#Maximes of reason, or, The reason of the common law of England by Edmond Wingate ...#

##Wingate, Edmund, 1596-1656.##
Maximes of reason, or, The reason of the common law of England by Edmond Wingate ...
Wingate, Edmund, 1596-1656.

##General Summary##

**Links**

[TCP catalogue](http://www.ota.ox.ac.uk/tcp/)  • 
[HTML](http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/tcp/Texts-HTML/free/A66/A66669.html)  • 
[EPUB](http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/tcp/Texts-EPUB/free/A66/A66669.epub) • 
[Page images (Historical Texts)](https://historicaltexts.jisc.ac.uk/eebo-12927293e)

**Availability**

To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to https://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information about the project.

**Major revisions**

1. __2012-04__ __TCP__ *Assigned for keying and markup*
1. __2012-05__ __SPi Global__ *Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images*
1. __2012-07__ __Mona Logarbo__ *Sampled and proofread*
1. __2012-07__ __Mona Logarbo__ *Text and markup reviewed and edited*
1. __2013-02__ __pfs__ *Batch review (QC) and XML conversion*

##Content Summary##

#####Front#####
MAXIMES OF REASON: OR, THE REASON OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.BY EDMOND WINGATE, late of Grayes-Inn
1. TO THE READER.

1. An Advertiſement to the Reader.

1. THE ORDER Of the Maximes of Reaſon; Or the Reaſon of the COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.

#####Body#####

1. Maximes of Reaſon: OR, THE REASON OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.
1 Summa Ratio eſt, quae pro Religione facit. It is the highe Reaſon that makes for Religion.Statutes2 Nunquam proſperè ſuccedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Humane Affairs never ſucceed wellPriſot.3 To ſuch Lawes as have warrant in holy Scripture, our Law giveth credence, & contra.Co. Inſt4 The Juriſdiction of the Eccleſiaſtical Law, ought to be bounded by the Common Law.Spiritual Laws.15 Dies Dominicus non eſt juridicus.The Lords day.1 In all the four terms the Lords day is not Dies j6 Gravius eſt divinam quam Temporalem laedere majeſtatem.Co. l. 11. 29. b. Poulters caſe.1 Regularly7 The Law disfavoureth an excomunicate perſon.Excommunication. Jury.1 It is a good plea in abatement8 The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymologie of words, and in the Conſtruction of them, 9 In Conjunctivis oportet utrumque,Bract. l. 2. fol. 19. a. in disjunctivis ſufficit alteram partem 10 Words in conſtruction muſt be referred to the next antecedent, where the matter it ſelfe doth not11 The Law delighteth in apt expreſſions.Co. Inſt. pars 1 302. a.1 Whenſoever a Confirmation doth en12 Nomina ſi neſcis perit cognitio rerum.Co. Inſt. 1. 68. b1 Right Interpretations and Etymologies a13 Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 146 b. & 223. b1 Sir Edward Cooke obſerves, 14 Qui haeret in littera haeret in Cortice. Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. &c.1 Although by the words of the S15 Talis interpretatio fienda eſt, ut evitetur abſurdum & inconveniens, & ne judicium ſit illuſorium16 Quoties in verbis nulla eſt ambiguitas, ibi nulla expoſitio contra verba expreſſa fienda eſt.Co. 17 Maledicta eſt expoſitio, quae corrumpit textum.Co. l. 2. 24. a. Baldwins Caſe1 The Earl of Cumber18 Nimia ſubtilitas in lege reprobatur.Co. l. 5. 121. a. Longs caſe.1 Exception was taken to an Indi19 Ceſſante cauſa ceſſat effectus.The Corporation failing, the land reveſts in the Donor.IF Land hol20 Remoto impedimento emergit actio, & contra.Co. Inſt. pars 1 128. b. 2.1 If the defendant plead an21 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the cauſe thereof. Vide 31. 9.Tenant by courteſ22 Cujus eſt dare ejus eſt diſponere.A proviſo imports a condition.1 A. bargaines and ſels the Manno23 Ultra poſſe non eſt eſſe, & Vice Verſa.Co. l. 6 58. a. 4. in Bredimaus Caſe.1 A Right (without an24 Nemo poteſt plus juris ad alium transferre quàm ipſe habet.Co. Inſt. pars 1 265. a. 2. Littl. § 425 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the beginning of them. Vide Max. 63. 21.Privile26 A derived power cannot be greater than that, from which it is derived. Derivata poteſtas non pote27 Things are diſſolved, as they be contracted. Unum quodque diſſolvitur eo modo, quo colligatum eſt28 Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection.Co. Inſt. pars 1 19 a. 429 Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.Where there can be no preſentment by lapſe.1 If the Bi30 He that claimeth Paramount a thing, ſhall never take benefit, nor hurt by it.Dos de dote peti non31 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundam ſubiectam materiam.Account by the Guardian.1 It hath béen a 32 According to the end.Knight-ſervice the defence of the Realm.1 The Tenant in Knight-ſervice,Co. I33 Qui adimit medium di rimit finem.Littl. § 237.1 Reſcous, Replevin,Diſſeſin of re•• and Incloſure 34 According to the effect.1 H. 6. 4. Finch 59.1 A Déed delivered by an Infant,Delivery of a deed. c35. He that cannot have or performe the effect or conſequence of a thing, ſhall not have the thing i36 Non officit conatus, niſi ſequatur effectus.Inheritances depend not upon uncertaine words.1 In Si37 Acta exteriora indicant interiora Secreta.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 257. b. 1. 10 H. 7, 12.1 One may comm38 Inutilis labor & ſine fructu, non eſt effectus Legis, & contra: And therefore nothing can be give39 Lex non Praecipit inutilia: Vide M. 177. 5.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 389. b. 3. Littl. § 743.1 If Tenant 40 Where the foundation faileth, all goeth to the ground, Debile fundamentum fallit opus, & contrà.•41 Things incident are adhaerent to their Superiours, or Principals.Deeds, &c. in whoſe cuſtody to r42 Quod tacitè intelligitur, deeſſe non videtur. V. 64. 11.•opiholds.1 When cuſtome hath once create43 Things by reaſon of another are in the ſame plight.Poſſeſſio fratris.1 Albeit the Maxime in Law b44 Perſonal things cannot be done by another.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 66. b. 3.1 A ſingle Corporation conſi45 They cannot be granted or transferred over, as matters of pleaſure, eaſe, truſt, and authority.To46 They being once ſuſpended, or diſcharged for a time, are for ever after extinct.Pl. Co. 36. a. 3.47 They dye with the perſon.•ſte.1 If the Tenant doth Waſte, and he in the reverſion dieth,Co. Inſt.48 Things do enure diverſly according to the diverſity of the time.Purchaſe by Inhabitants.1 The Par49 Quod prius eſt tempore, potius eſt jure. Vide Max. 62. Pl. 10. 19.•emitter.1 One of the reaſons o50 According to the diverſity of the ſame perſon.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 8. a. 1. in Calvins caſe. Co. ib.51 According to the diverſity of ſeverall perſons. Vide infrà, 86.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 46. a. 3.1 If Te52 Relation is of great force in Law.•nceſtor and •eir; and the •eſtator, and •xecutor Cor••laiiva.153 Verba poſteriora propter certitu•inem addita, ad priora, quae certitudine indigent, ſunt referend54 No man can do an act to himſelf.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 38. b. 4. & 39 a. 4.1 A Feme Guardian in Soccag55 The Law favoureth privity. Vide Max. 47. 16.Co. Inſt. pars 1 28. a. 2.1 Tenant in tail after poſſ56 Equal things cannot drown one another, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1 273. b. 3.1 If a man make a leaſ57 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundum aequalitatem rationis.Finch 20. Bract. l. 1. c. 3.1 This Rul58. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, eſt puniendus.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 233. b. 2.1 If a Keeper of59 Omne majus continet in ſe minus.Co. Inſt. pars 1 44 b. 1.1 Albeit by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 160 Additio probat minoritatem.•e is Fee-••mple.1 When you finde it ſaid in any Book,Co. Inſt. pars 161 A matter of higher nature determineth a matter of lower nature, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 83. a.62 The more worthy thing draweth unto it things of leſſe worthineſſe.Finch, 23.1 The body of a man i63 Acceſſarium Sequitur Principale.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 49. a. 3.1 If an houſe or land belong to an Off64 Things acceſſary are of the nature of the Principal.40 Aſſ. Pl. 25.1 A ſervant procureth another 65 A mans own words are void, when the Law ſpeaketh as much, or otherwiſe. Vide M. 41. 6, 7, 9.New i66 Expreſsio eorum, quae tacitè inſunt nihil operatur.•pon the Qu. •ant of the •verſion, de•and muſt67 Parte quacunque integrante ſublata, tollitur totum.Co. l. 3. 41. a. 3. in Ratcliffs caſe.1 Lands 68 Ex tota materia emergat Reſolutio.Co. l. 3. 59. b. 1. in Lincoln Colledg caſe.1 It is the office 69 Partes ſimul ſumptae componunt totum: & Totum comprehendit ſuas partes.••int grants •aſſe all.1 W70 Intire things cannot be ſevered.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. a. 1. and 164. b. 3.1 Of Inheritances that 71 Argumentum à Diviſione eſt fortiſsimum in Lege.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 213. b. 3.1 An example or two of t72 The Generals muſt go before, and the Specials muſt follow after.•enerals be•e Specials.1 In a wri73 The more worthy ſhall be ſet before the leſſer worthy.•grees of •hineſs of •d, &c.1 An intire thi74 Sicut natura non facit ſaltum, Ita nec Lex.•der in writs1 In writs of Entry ſur diſſeiſin, if the75 A digniori fieri debet Denominatio & Reſolutio.Quod ei de•rceat for te•ant in Dow•r and by the •o76 The Law requireth decencie and order.The Homager muſt ſeek his Lord.1 The tenant ought to ſéek th77 Negatio Concluſionis eſt error in Lege.Co. l. 10. a. 4. in Priddle and Nappers Caſe.1 In Attachme78 The Law reſpecteth the Bonds of Nature.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 78. a. 2.1 If before the Statutes of 32 & 79 Nemo praeſumitur alienam poſteritatem ſuae praetuliſſe.Collaterall Warrantie.1 If the Tenant in t80 The Law eſteemeth and judgeth of all things according to their nature and quality.Co. Inſt. p. 1.81 In perſons, the Law looketh at the excellency of ſome, and giveth them ſingular Priviledges, and 82 Likewiſe the Law giveth greater priviledges to men, then to Women.Wardſhip, •ody, Father, •ot Mot83 The Law tendreth the weakneſſe and debility of other perſons, as thoſe out of the Realme, in Priſ84 The Law (in ſome Caſes) tendreth the ignorance of men un-lettered.7 E. 3. 9. Co. Inſt. P. 1. 301.85 The Law favoureth Strangers, that are neither parties nor privies.•ord. Tenant. •eofment •pon Con86 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, ſed quando que prodeſſe poteſt. Vide ſupra, Max. 5187 Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 145. b. 3.1 In a Replevin,Replevin. the Defendant88 The Law favoureth things done in anothers Right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 52. a. 2.1 Few or no perſons are 89 The Law diſ-favoureth other perſons, as Villeins, Bond-men, Out-lawes, Ex-leges, men in Exile, Al
    _ 90 As concerning the ages of Infants, the Law ordereth them in this manner;
Seven, for the Lord to have aid for the marriage of his eldeſt daughter of that age.Nine,Litt. §. 36. for a woman to deſerve her Dower.Twelve for a man to take the Oath of Allegiance in a Turn or Leet; and alſo to binde a woman in matter of Marriage.Fourteen, the age of diſcretion; and therefore that a competent age to binde the man in matter of Marriage, for a Ward in Soccage to chuſe his Guardian, and for a woman to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.Fifteen, for the Lord to have Aid to make his eldeſt Son (of that a•e) a Knight.Seventeen, for an Infant Executor to be out of the tuition of Adminiſtrators.Eighteen, for an Infant to have power to make a Will.One and twenty, their full age to make good any Act they do, and for a man to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.
91 In things, the Law reſpecteth every thing, according to Worthineſſe.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 2. If a92 The Law reſpecteth life and liberty moſt, and the Perſon above his poſſeſſions.•e Lords 〈◊〉 ſtati93 Things in the Realty more then thoſe in the Perſonalty.In waſte, the place waſted • more reſpect 94 Freehold and Inheritance more then it doth Chattels.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 3. a. 2.1 The Pariſhioners or95 Matter of Record more then other tranſactions.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 161. a. 3.1 There is a diverſity be96 Conveyances by Livery, or which paſſe Eſtates of the Land, more then thoſe that paſſe by Grant, o97 A matter in the right, more then a matter in poſſeſſion.Fore-judger •f Meſne.1 If the tenant be d98 Yet it favoureth Poſſeſſion, where the right is equal.Happe the •ardſhip.1 If a man purchaſeth at99 The Law reſpecteth matters of profit, and Intereſt, largely; Of pleaſure, skill, eaſe, truſt auth100 And therefore theſe may be countermanded, ſo cannot thoſe.An office without profit diſcharged, w101 Matter of ſubſtance more then matter of circumſtance.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 114. b. 2.1 In a writ of Me102 Yet for memory and ſolemnity ſubſtances are to be-expreſt under Ceremonies.〈◊〉 actions de•ce muſ103 Things executed and done more, then executorie, and to do. Vide 40. 51.•ery in 〈◊〉 without •y vo104 Poſſibility of things.•ſibility if ••riage.1 If Lands be given to a man and a woman un-married,C105 And therefore nothing to be void, which by poſſibility may be good.1 Vide ſupra R. 104. e. 1.Co.106 Id certum eſt, quod certum reddi poteſt.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 96. a. 2.1 If a man hold of his Lord by 107 Res non per ſe invicem, ſed per pecuniam eſtimantur, & non pecunia per Res.Diverſity of a Condit108 It favoureth mutual Recompence.Fee-ſimple without the •ord Heires.1 Vpon partition betwéen Copar109 De minimis non curat Lex.Co. l. 5. 56. b. 3. Knights Caſe.1 In Office by commiſſion under the Ex110 In Actions the Law yeeldeth favour, when for the doing of them there is, 1 Neceſsity.Co. Inſt. p111. 2 Conveniencie.Co. l. 9. 49. a. b. The Earl of Shrewsburies Caſe. Vide Max. 184 cap. 5.1 If a P112. 3 Conformity.••dowment •••ium.1 In ancient time when a man did endow his Wife ad oſtium Eccleſi113. 4 Colour.•o diſcent to 〈◊〉 away en•y.1 If a man ſeiſed of Land hath iſſue two Sonnes, and die ſ114 It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law more then thoſe, that are done by the party.Co. Inſt. 115 Utique fortior, eſt diſpoſitio Legis, quam hominis.Co. Inſt. p. 1 310. a. 1. & •87 b. 2.1 If a r116. It reputeth that a man will deal for their own beſt advantage.•••neſſe.1 Vpon this ground it is117 And therefore the Law believeth againſt the party whatſoever is to his prejudice.Co. Inſt. p: 1.118 When ſeveral remedies are given, the party, to whom the Law giveth them, hath thereby alſo elect119 Cujus eſt diviſio, alterius eſt Electio.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 166. b. 2. & Litt. §. 245.1 Vpon partiti120 Nemo prohibetur pluribus deſenſionibus uti.•ral Pleas 〈◊〉.1 Where the Tenant or Demandant may pl121 Conſenſus tollit Errorem.When by conſent no challenge.1 When in a writ of right the Iury, that a122 Volenti non fit injuria.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 368. a. 2. Litt. §. 701. Pl. Com. 91. the Parſon of Hony123 Quilibet poteſt renunciare juri per ſe introducto.••main.1 Land may be amortified by Licences gr124 Omnis Ratihabitio retró-trahitur, & mandato ſeu licentiae aequiparatur.••gageor & •rtgagee.1 If 125 Nemo tenetur accuſare ſeipſum.Co. Inſt. p. 1 158. b. 1.1 In trial of Challenges,Challenge of a J126 Nec ſe infortuniis & periculis exponere.1 In making continual claime, if the adverſe party lie iFor the time of doing things it countenanceth more. 127 Things done in time of Peace, than in time o128 Things done in the day more then thoſe done in the night.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 135. a. 4. Mirr. l. 5. When things are fit to be ſtraightned to a certaine time, it eſteemeth, according to the nature of t130 Sometimes a whole yeare.•• protection ••re a yeare.1 No protection either profecturae or moratur131 Sometimes the laſt part of the laſt day.Co Inſt. p. 1. 202. a. 2. Co l. 5. 114 b. 2 in Wades caſ132 When no time is limited, the Law appointeth the moſt convenient, and in ſome Caſes, the immediat133 The third offence is eſteemed moſt heynous.2 E. 4. 1.1 The third writ not returned by the Sherif134 The place alſo ought to be convenient.Litt. §. 180. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 120. a. 1.1 If a Villain pur 135 The Law favoureth Charity.••nder by any 〈◊〉 an Ideot.1 Vpon a Mortgage, if the Mortgageor die,C136 De mortuis nil niſi bonum.Littl. §. 399. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 244. a 3. Co. l. 8. 101: a. 3. in Sir R137 And therefore, it hateth malice and oppreſſion.••rious ap••l.1 The Common Law abhorre malice in 138 It favoureth Vertue.139 Hateth Vice.•••ition ••nful void.1 A Remainder may enure upon Condition 140 Intereſt Reipublicae, ne maleficia remaneant impunita.••feit in•• no good 〈◊〉.1 Where an Indictm141 It favoureth Juſtice and right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 33. a. 1.1 In a writ of Dower brought againſt the142 That, which is not tortious in it ſelfe, cannot be tortious to any.Co. lib. 11. 98. b. 1. in Edw143. Interest Reipublicae, ne Curia Domini Regis deficeret in Juſticia exhibenda.A Letter of Attorne144. It favoureth Common Right.…ment of ••wer.1. Dower being a thing due of Common right,Co. Inſt. p145. And therefore it ſuffereth things againſt principles of Law, rather then the party ſhould be wi146. It hateth Wrong.Diſparagement of the heir puniſhed.1.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 80. b. 2. The Law doth h147. So as none ſhall take benefit or advantage of their own wrong.Litt. S. 19. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 23148. And therefore the Law of it ſelf prejudiceth none.Diſtreſſe.1. Any goods may be diſtrained for 149.Vide M. 150. Ex. 9. Eſpecially for things that cannot be imputed to their own folly, or neglect.150. Nemo debet rem ſuam ſine facto vel def•ctu ſuo amittere.Litt. S. 442. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 262. b.151. It driveth not a man to ſhew, take notice of, or do that which by intendment he knoweth not, or152. Nor to do that, which were in vain for him to do.Litt. S. 103. Co. Inſt pars 1. 79. a. 2.1. If 153. Non licet, quod diſpendio licet.Surrenders.1. M. Leaſes for twenty one years to S. and is bound154. It favoreth Truth, Faith, and Certainty. Vide Max. 41. •9.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. a. 3.1. Regula255. It Disfavoureth Impoſſibilities.Co. Inſt. pars, 1. 25. b. 4.1. If Lands be given to a man and t156. Non cogit ad Impoſſibilia, & Impotentia excuſat Legem.Shewing a Deed.1. If a Deed remaine in on157. It disfavoureth Falſhood, Fraud, and Covin, Vide Dyer 294. 8.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 17. b. 3.1. A man 158. Jus & Fraus numquam Cohabitant.Co. l. 10. 45. a. 4. in Jennings his caſe.1. The Statute of 14 E159. Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur & per obliquum.Litt. S. 361. Co. Inſt. p160. Rectum est index ſui & Obliqui.Co. l. 10. 24. b. 2.1. In the Caſe of Suttons Hoſpitall Sir Edwa161. It disfavoureth Improbabilities.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l. 10. 50. b. 1. in Lampets caſe.162. Uncertainties, by which the truth may be inveigled.Villain.1. If a man do enfranchiſe a Villain163. Imperſonalitas non concludit nec ligat.Co. Inſt. 1. 352. b. 1. Pl. Co. 398. a. 1.1. An Eſtoppel164. Generale nihil certi implicat.Generall words.1.Co. Inſt. 1. 33. a. 3. Dodingtons caſe. If the K165. Doloſus verſatur in generalibus.Co. l. 3. 80. b. 4. Twines caſe.1. P. being indebted to T. in f166. Variance.Co. Inſt. 1. 131. a. 4.1. A materiall Variance between a Protection,Protection. and thVide 40. 53.167. Contrariety and Repugnancy. And therefore,Libera Eleemoſina.Co. Inſt. 1. 97. a.1. I168. It will not drive a man to juſtifie or ſhew that, which he goeth about to defeate, or which mak169. Non poteſt adduci exceptio ejuſdem rei, cujus petitur diſſolutio.Taile diſcontinued.1. If Tenan170. None ſhall take exception to an Error or Act, which operateth to his own advantage.Co. l. 3. 69171 Nemo tenetur armare adverſarium ſuum contraſe.Challenge.1 He that challengeth a Iuror for the hu172 It favoureth Diligence; And therefore hateth Folly and Negligence.Waſte,1 Waſte may be done in h173 Negligentia ſemper habet infortunium Comitem.Laches.1. Regularly,Co. Inſt. pars 1. 246. b. 2. no174 Vigilantibus non Dormientibus Leges ſubveniunt.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. b. 1.1 At the Common Law u175 It favoureth ſpeeding of mens Cauſes; And thereforeProtections,1 In antient time,Co. Inſt. pars 176 Hateth Delayes.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. b. 41 Some ſay, that the demandant in a writ of Dower,Dower177 Unneceſſary Circumſtances; And therefore, Fruſtrafit per plura, quod fieri poteſt per Pauciora.T178 Expedit Reipublicae, ut ſit finis Litium.1 Regularly, an Abbot, Prior, Biſhop,Abbot. Annuity. or179 Circuit of Action.Co. Inſt. part 1. 265. a. 3.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 446. If the father be diſſei180 Matter of Vexation; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 127. a. 1.1 If the demandant or plaintif be n181 Pendente Lite nihil innovetur.Quar• Imped•t.1 At the Common Law,Co. Inſt. part 1. 344. b. 3. if 182 Infiniteneſs and multiplicity of ſutes.Co. Inſt. part 1. 56. a. 2. Co. l. 5. 73. a. 3. in Willia183 The Law conſtrueth things with Equity and Moderation.Convenient time.1 In 18 E. 4. 22.Co. l. 3. 184 Reſtraineth a general Act or Rule, and (ſometimes alſo) a Particular contract, if there be found185 Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.App•al. Indictment.1 Wetherol brings an appeal of murder agai186 It flyeth and preventeth all occaſions of Evill.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 88. b. 1. Littl. §. 123.1 The 187 It moderateth the ſtrictneſs of the Law it ſelf.Co. I ſt. part 1 13. •. 1.1 A Protection Moratur188 Verba ſemper accipienda ſunt in mitiori ſenſu.Slander.1 If one ſay to another, that he is perjur189. Conſtrueth things according to Common poſſibility or intendment; And thereforeJudges.1 Regularl190 Stabit praeſumptio donec probetur in Contrarium.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 222. b. 3. 34 Aſſ. pl. 1.1 If 191 Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Jura adaptantur.Co. Inſt. part l. 238. a. 2.1 It is ſaid,Deſcen192 Frequentia Actus multum operatur.Fine. Non-claim.1 A. poſſeſſed of divers lands in D. for years,193 It alwayes conſtrueth things to the Beſt; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 87. b. 3.1 If a man be 194 Every Act to be lawfull, when it ſtandeth indifferent, whether it ſhould be lawfull, or not.Co. 195 Non praeſtat impedimentum, quod de Jure non ſortitur effectum. Vide 195, 13.Baſtard eigne & Muli196 Praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.Co. l. 11 88. b. 1 in the caſe of Monopolies.1 The 197 The Law favoureth things for the Common-wealth.Incapable Officers.1 If an Office either of the g198 Publique Commerce. Vide ſupra 198, 31.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 2. b. 2.1 If an Alien take a leaſe for y199 Honor and Order.Tenant by Curteſie.1 A man ſhall be tenant by the Curteſie of an houſe,Co. Inſt.200 Publique quiet.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 5. a. 3.1 No Subject can build a Caſtle or houſe of ſtrength im201 Conventio ſeu beneficium privatorum non poteſt publico juri derogare. Vide ſupra 198, 29.Co. Inſ202 Minime mutanda ſunt, quae certam habuerunt interpretationem. Vide Max. 201. per tout.Co. Inſt. p203 A Communi Obſervantia non eſt recedendum.Littl §. 371. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 229 b 4. Vide Max. 203.204 Eventus varios Res nova ſemper habet; And therefore it hateth new Inventions, and Innovations.Co205 Communis Error facit Jus.Co. Inſt. 1. 52. b. 2.1 In a deed of feoffment beginning with Omnibus C206 So doth a Cuſtom, which is reaſonable: unreaſonable, contra.Co. Inſt. •pars 1. 59 b. 41 Of fines207 Licet Conſuetudo ſit magnae Authoritatis, Nunquam tamen Praejudicat manifeſtae veritati.Co. l. 4208 Husband and wife are one Perſon, And thereforeRebutter.1 If a feme heir of a diſſeiſor enfeoff m209 The Wife is of the ſame Condition with her Husband.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 16. b. 3. & Co. l. 4 118 b.210 They cannot ſue one another, nor make any grant one to the other, or the like.Baron cannot g•a• 211 Upon a joynt Purchaſe during the Coverture, either of them taketh the whole.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 55212 The Husband is the Womans head; And thereforeHomage by Baron and feme.1 The husband and wife doi213 All that ſhe hath is her Husbands. Vide Ho. 216.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 112. a. 4.1 Omnia, quae ſunt u214. Her will ought to become his will, and to be ſubject unto it.Co. Inſt pars 1. 112. b. 1.1. The 
1. I Maximes of Reaſon taken out of THEOLOGIE.
1 Summa Ratio eſt, quae pro Religione facit. It is the highe Reaſon that makes for Religion.Statutes2 Nunquam proſperè ſuccedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Humane Affairs never ſucceed wellPriſot.3 To ſuch Lawes as have warrant in holy Scripture, our Law giveth credence, & contra.Co. Inſt4 The Juriſdiction of the Eccleſiaſtical Law, ought to be bounded by the Common Law.Spiritual Laws.15 Dies Dominicus non eſt juridicus.The Lords day.1 In all the four terms the Lords day is not Dies j6 Gravius eſt divinam quam Temporalem laedere majeſtatem.Co. l. 11. 29. b. Poulters caſe.1 Regularly7 The Law disfavoureth an excomunicate perſon.Excommunication. Jury.1 It is a good plea in abatement8 The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymologie of words, and in the Conſtruction of them, 9 In Conjunctivis oportet utrumque,Bract. l. 2. fol. 19. a. in disjunctivis ſufficit alteram partem 10 Words in conſtruction muſt be referred to the next antecedent, where the matter it ſelfe doth not11 The Law delighteth in apt expreſſions.Co. Inſt. pars 1 302. a.1 Whenſoever a Confirmation doth en12 Nomina ſi neſcis perit cognitio rerum.Co. Inſt. 1. 68. b1 Right Interpretations and Etymologies a13 Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 146 b. & 223. b1 Sir Edward Cooke obſerves, 14 Qui haeret in littera haeret in Cortice. Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. &c.1 Although by the words of the S15 Talis interpretatio fienda eſt, ut evitetur abſurdum & inconveniens, & ne judicium ſit illuſorium16 Quoties in verbis nulla eſt ambiguitas, ibi nulla expoſitio contra verba expreſſa fienda eſt.Co. 17 Maledicta eſt expoſitio, quae corrumpit textum.Co. l. 2. 24. a. Baldwins Caſe1 The Earl of Cumber18 Nimia ſubtilitas in lege reprobatur.Co. l. 5. 121. a. Longs caſe.1 Exception was taken to an Indi19 Ceſſante cauſa ceſſat effectus.The Corporation failing, the land reveſts in the Donor.IF Land hol20 Remoto impedimento emergit actio, & contra.Co. Inſt. pars 1 128. b. 2.1 If the defendant plead an21 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the cauſe thereof. Vide 31. 9.Tenant by courteſ22 Cujus eſt dare ejus eſt diſponere.A proviſo imports a condition.1 A. bargaines and ſels the Manno23 Ultra poſſe non eſt eſſe, & Vice Verſa.Co. l. 6 58. a. 4. in Bredimaus Caſe.1 A Right (without an24 Nemo poteſt plus juris ad alium transferre quàm ipſe habet.Co. Inſt. pars 1 265. a. 2. Littl. § 425 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the beginning of them. Vide Max. 63. 21.Privile26 A derived power cannot be greater than that, from which it is derived. Derivata poteſtas non pote27 Things are diſſolved, as they be contracted. Unum quodque diſſolvitur eo modo, quo colligatum eſt28 Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection.Co. Inſt. pars 1 19 a. 429 Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.Where there can be no preſentment by lapſe.1 If the Bi30 He that claimeth Paramount a thing, ſhall never take benefit, nor hurt by it.Dos de dote peti non31 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundam ſubiectam materiam.Account by the Guardian.1 It hath béen a 32 According to the end.Knight-ſervice the defence of the Realm.1 The Tenant in Knight-ſervice,Co. I33 Qui adimit medium di rimit finem.Littl. § 237.1 Reſcous, Replevin,Diſſeſin of re•• and Incloſure 34 According to the effect.1 H. 6. 4. Finch 59.1 A Déed delivered by an Infant,Delivery of a deed. c35. He that cannot have or performe the effect or conſequence of a thing, ſhall not have the thing i36 Non officit conatus, niſi ſequatur effectus.Inheritances depend not upon uncertaine words.1 In Si37 Acta exteriora indicant interiora Secreta.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 257. b. 1. 10 H. 7, 12.1 One may comm38 Inutilis labor & ſine fructu, non eſt effectus Legis, & contra: And therefore nothing can be give39 Lex non Praecipit inutilia: Vide M. 177. 5.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 389. b. 3. Littl. § 743.1 If Tenant 40 Where the foundation faileth, all goeth to the ground, Debile fundamentum fallit opus, & contrà.•41 Things incident are adhaerent to their Superiours, or Principals.Deeds, &c. in whoſe cuſtody to r42 Quod tacitè intelligitur, deeſſe non videtur. V. 64. 11.•opiholds.1 When cuſtome hath once create43 Things by reaſon of another are in the ſame plight.Poſſeſſio fratris.1 Albeit the Maxime in Law b44 Perſonal things cannot be done by another.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 66. b. 3.1 A ſingle Corporation conſi45 They cannot be granted or transferred over, as matters of pleaſure, eaſe, truſt, and authority.To46 They being once ſuſpended, or diſcharged for a time, are for ever after extinct.Pl. Co. 36. a. 3.47 They dye with the perſon.•ſte.1 If the Tenant doth Waſte, and he in the reverſion dieth,Co. Inſt.48 Things do enure diverſly according to the diverſity of the time.Purchaſe by Inhabitants.1 The Par49 Quod prius eſt tempore, potius eſt jure. Vide Max. 62. Pl. 10. 19.•emitter.1 One of the reaſons o50 According to the diverſity of the ſame perſon.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 8. a. 1. in Calvins caſe. Co. ib.51 According to the diverſity of ſeverall perſons. Vide infrà, 86.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 46. a. 3.1 If Te52 Relation is of great force in Law.•nceſtor and •eir; and the •eſtator, and •xecutor Cor••laiiva.153 Verba poſteriora propter certitu•inem addita, ad priora, quae certitudine indigent, ſunt referend54 No man can do an act to himſelf.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 38. b. 4. & 39 a. 4.1 A Feme Guardian in Soccag55 The Law favoureth privity. Vide Max. 47. 16.Co. Inſt. pars 1 28. a. 2.1 Tenant in tail after poſſ56 Equal things cannot drown one another, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1 273. b. 3.1 If a man make a leaſ57 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundum aequalitatem rationis.Finch 20. Bract. l. 1. c. 3.1 This Rul58. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, eſt puniendus.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 233. b. 2.1 If a Keeper of59 Omne majus continet in ſe minus.Co. Inſt. pars 1 44 b. 1.1 Albeit by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 160 Additio probat minoritatem.•e is Fee-••mple.1 When you finde it ſaid in any Book,Co. Inſt. pars 161 A matter of higher nature determineth a matter of lower nature, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 83. a.62 The more worthy thing draweth unto it things of leſſe worthineſſe.Finch, 23.1 The body of a man i63 Acceſſarium Sequitur Principale.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 49. a. 3.1 If an houſe or land belong to an Off64 Things acceſſary are of the nature of the Principal.40 Aſſ. Pl. 25.1 A ſervant procureth another 65 A mans own words are void, when the Law ſpeaketh as much, or otherwiſe. Vide M. 41. 6, 7, 9.New i66 Expreſsio eorum, quae tacitè inſunt nihil operatur.•pon the Qu. •ant of the •verſion, de•and muſt67 Parte quacunque integrante ſublata, tollitur totum.Co. l. 3. 41. a. 3. in Ratcliffs caſe.1 Lands 68 Ex tota materia emergat Reſolutio.Co. l. 3. 59. b. 1. in Lincoln Colledg caſe.1 It is the office 69 Partes ſimul ſumptae componunt totum: & Totum comprehendit ſuas partes.••int grants •aſſe all.1 W70 Intire things cannot be ſevered.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. a. 1. and 164. b. 3.1 Of Inheritances that 71 Argumentum à Diviſione eſt fortiſsimum in Lege.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 213. b. 3.1 An example or two of t72 The Generals muſt go before, and the Specials muſt follow after.•enerals be•e Specials.1 In a wri73 The more worthy ſhall be ſet before the leſſer worthy.•grees of •hineſs of •d, &c.1 An intire thi74 Sicut natura non facit ſaltum, Ita nec Lex.•der in writs1 In writs of Entry ſur diſſeiſin, if the75 A digniori fieri debet Denominatio & Reſolutio.Quod ei de•rceat for te•ant in Dow•r and by the •o76 The Law requireth decencie and order.The Homager muſt ſeek his Lord.1 The tenant ought to ſéek th77 Negatio Concluſionis eſt error in Lege.Co. l. 10. a. 4. in Priddle and Nappers Caſe.1 In Attachme78 The Law reſpecteth the Bonds of Nature.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 78. a. 2.1 If before the Statutes of 32 & 79 Nemo praeſumitur alienam poſteritatem ſuae praetuliſſe.Collaterall Warrantie.1 If the Tenant in t80 The Law eſteemeth and judgeth of all things according to their nature and quality.Co. Inſt. p. 1.81 In perſons, the Law looketh at the excellency of ſome, and giveth them ſingular Priviledges, and 82 Likewiſe the Law giveth greater priviledges to men, then to Women.Wardſhip, •ody, Father, •ot Mot83 The Law tendreth the weakneſſe and debility of other perſons, as thoſe out of the Realme, in Priſ84 The Law (in ſome Caſes) tendreth the ignorance of men un-lettered.7 E. 3. 9. Co. Inſt. P. 1. 301.85 The Law favoureth Strangers, that are neither parties nor privies.•ord. Tenant. •eofment •pon Con86 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, ſed quando que prodeſſe poteſt. Vide ſupra, Max. 5187 Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 145. b. 3.1 In a Replevin,Replevin. the Defendant88 The Law favoureth things done in anothers Right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 52. a. 2.1 Few or no perſons are 89 The Law diſ-favoureth other perſons, as Villeins, Bond-men, Out-lawes, Ex-leges, men in Exile, Al
    _ 90 As concerning the ages of Infants, the Law ordereth them in this manner;
Seven, for the Lord to have aid for the marriage of his eldeſt daughter of that age.Nine,Litt. §. 36. for a woman to deſerve her Dower.Twelve for a man to take the Oath of Allegiance in a Turn or Leet; and alſo to binde a woman in matter of Marriage.Fourteen, the age of diſcretion; and therefore that a competent age to binde the man in matter of Marriage, for a Ward in Soccage to chuſe his Guardian, and for a woman to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.Fifteen, for the Lord to have Aid to make his eldeſt Son (of that a•e) a Knight.Seventeen, for an Infant Executor to be out of the tuition of Adminiſtrators.Eighteen, for an Infant to have power to make a Will.One and twenty, their full age to make good any Act they do, and for a man to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.
91 In things, the Law reſpecteth every thing, according to Worthineſſe.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 2. If a92 The Law reſpecteth life and liberty moſt, and the Perſon above his poſſeſſions.•e Lords 〈◊〉 ſtati93 Things in the Realty more then thoſe in the Perſonalty.In waſte, the place waſted • more reſpect 94 Freehold and Inheritance more then it doth Chattels.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 3. a. 2.1 The Pariſhioners or95 Matter of Record more then other tranſactions.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 161. a. 3.1 There is a diverſity be96 Conveyances by Livery, or which paſſe Eſtates of the Land, more then thoſe that paſſe by Grant, o97 A matter in the right, more then a matter in poſſeſſion.Fore-judger •f Meſne.1 If the tenant be d98 Yet it favoureth Poſſeſſion, where the right is equal.Happe the •ardſhip.1 If a man purchaſeth at99 The Law reſpecteth matters of profit, and Intereſt, largely; Of pleaſure, skill, eaſe, truſt auth100 And therefore theſe may be countermanded, ſo cannot thoſe.An office without profit diſcharged, w101 Matter of ſubſtance more then matter of circumſtance.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 114. b. 2.1 In a writ of Me102 Yet for memory and ſolemnity ſubſtances are to be-expreſt under Ceremonies.〈◊〉 actions de•ce muſ103 Things executed and done more, then executorie, and to do. Vide 40. 51.•ery in 〈◊〉 without •y vo104 Poſſibility of things.•ſibility if ••riage.1 If Lands be given to a man and a woman un-married,C105 And therefore nothing to be void, which by poſſibility may be good.1 Vide ſupra R. 104. e. 1.Co.106 Id certum eſt, quod certum reddi poteſt.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 96. a. 2.1 If a man hold of his Lord by 107 Res non per ſe invicem, ſed per pecuniam eſtimantur, & non pecunia per Res.Diverſity of a Condit108 It favoureth mutual Recompence.Fee-ſimple without the •ord Heires.1 Vpon partition betwéen Copar109 De minimis non curat Lex.Co. l. 5. 56. b. 3. Knights Caſe.1 In Office by commiſſion under the Ex110 In Actions the Law yeeldeth favour, when for the doing of them there is, 1 Neceſsity.Co. Inſt. p111. 2 Conveniencie.Co. l. 9. 49. a. b. The Earl of Shrewsburies Caſe. Vide Max. 184 cap. 5.1 If a P112. 3 Conformity.••dowment •••ium.1 In ancient time when a man did endow his Wife ad oſtium Eccleſi113. 4 Colour.•o diſcent to 〈◊〉 away en•y.1 If a man ſeiſed of Land hath iſſue two Sonnes, and die ſ114 It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law more then thoſe, that are done by the party.Co. Inſt. 115 Utique fortior, eſt diſpoſitio Legis, quam hominis.Co. Inſt. p. 1 310. a. 1. & •87 b. 2.1 If a r116. It reputeth that a man will deal for their own beſt advantage.•••neſſe.1 Vpon this ground it is117 And therefore the Law believeth againſt the party whatſoever is to his prejudice.Co. Inſt. p: 1.118 When ſeveral remedies are given, the party, to whom the Law giveth them, hath thereby alſo elect119 Cujus eſt diviſio, alterius eſt Electio.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 166. b. 2. & Litt. §. 245.1 Vpon partiti120 Nemo prohibetur pluribus deſenſionibus uti.•ral Pleas 〈◊〉.1 Where the Tenant or Demandant may pl121 Conſenſus tollit Errorem.When by conſent no challenge.1 When in a writ of right the Iury, that a122 Volenti non fit injuria.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 368. a. 2. Litt. §. 701. Pl. Com. 91. the Parſon of Hony123 Quilibet poteſt renunciare juri per ſe introducto.••main.1 Land may be amortified by Licences gr124 Omnis Ratihabitio retró-trahitur, & mandato ſeu licentiae aequiparatur.••gageor & •rtgagee.1 If 125 Nemo tenetur accuſare ſeipſum.Co. Inſt. p. 1 158. b. 1.1 In trial of Challenges,Challenge of a J126 Nec ſe infortuniis & periculis exponere.1 In making continual claime, if the adverſe party lie iFor the time of doing things it countenanceth more. 127 Things done in time of Peace, than in time o128 Things done in the day more then thoſe done in the night.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 135. a. 4. Mirr. l. 5. When things are fit to be ſtraightned to a certaine time, it eſteemeth, according to the nature of t130 Sometimes a whole yeare.•• protection ••re a yeare.1 No protection either profecturae or moratur131 Sometimes the laſt part of the laſt day.Co Inſt. p. 1. 202. a. 2. Co l. 5. 114 b. 2 in Wades caſ132 When no time is limited, the Law appointeth the moſt convenient, and in ſome Caſes, the immediat133 The third offence is eſteemed moſt heynous.2 E. 4. 1.1 The third writ not returned by the Sherif134 The place alſo ought to be convenient.Litt. §. 180. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 120. a. 1.1 If a Villain pur 135 The Law favoureth Charity.••nder by any 〈◊〉 an Ideot.1 Vpon a Mortgage, if the Mortgageor die,C136 De mortuis nil niſi bonum.Littl. §. 399. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 244. a 3. Co. l. 8. 101: a. 3. in Sir R137 And therefore, it hateth malice and oppreſſion.••rious ap••l.1 The Common Law abhorre malice in 138 It favoureth Vertue.139 Hateth Vice.•••ition ••nful void.1 A Remainder may enure upon Condition 140 Intereſt Reipublicae, ne maleficia remaneant impunita.••feit in•• no good 〈◊〉.1 Where an Indictm141 It favoureth Juſtice and right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 33. a. 1.1 In a writ of Dower brought againſt the142 That, which is not tortious in it ſelfe, cannot be tortious to any.Co. lib. 11. 98. b. 1. in Edw143. Interest Reipublicae, ne Curia Domini Regis deficeret in Juſticia exhibenda.A Letter of Attorne144. It favoureth Common Right.…ment of ••wer.1. Dower being a thing due of Common right,Co. Inſt. p145. And therefore it ſuffereth things againſt principles of Law, rather then the party ſhould be wi146. It hateth Wrong.Diſparagement of the heir puniſhed.1.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 80. b. 2. The Law doth h147. So as none ſhall take benefit or advantage of their own wrong.Litt. S. 19. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 23148. And therefore the Law of it ſelf prejudiceth none.Diſtreſſe.1. Any goods may be diſtrained for 149.Vide M. 150. Ex. 9. Eſpecially for things that cannot be imputed to their own folly, or neglect.150. Nemo debet rem ſuam ſine facto vel def•ctu ſuo amittere.Litt. S. 442. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 262. b.151. It driveth not a man to ſhew, take notice of, or do that which by intendment he knoweth not, or152. Nor to do that, which were in vain for him to do.Litt. S. 103. Co. Inſt pars 1. 79. a. 2.1. If 153. Non licet, quod diſpendio licet.Surrenders.1. M. Leaſes for twenty one years to S. and is bound154. It favoreth Truth, Faith, and Certainty. Vide Max. 41. •9.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. a. 3.1. Regula255. It Disfavoureth Impoſſibilities.Co. Inſt. pars, 1. 25. b. 4.1. If Lands be given to a man and t156. Non cogit ad Impoſſibilia, & Impotentia excuſat Legem.Shewing a Deed.1. If a Deed remaine in on157. It disfavoureth Falſhood, Fraud, and Covin, Vide Dyer 294. 8.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 17. b. 3.1. A man 158. Jus & Fraus numquam Cohabitant.Co. l. 10. 45. a. 4. in Jennings his caſe.1. The Statute of 14 E159. Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur & per obliquum.Litt. S. 361. Co. Inſt. p160. Rectum est index ſui & Obliqui.Co. l. 10. 24. b. 2.1. In the Caſe of Suttons Hoſpitall Sir Edwa161. It disfavoureth Improbabilities.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l. 10. 50. b. 1. in Lampets caſe.162. Uncertainties, by which the truth may be inveigled.Villain.1. If a man do enfranchiſe a Villain163. Imperſonalitas non concludit nec ligat.Co. Inſt. 1. 352. b. 1. Pl. Co. 398. a. 1.1. An Eſtoppel164. Generale nihil certi implicat.Generall words.1.Co. Inſt. 1. 33. a. 3. Dodingtons caſe. If the K165. Doloſus verſatur in generalibus.Co. l. 3. 80. b. 4. Twines caſe.1. P. being indebted to T. in f166. Variance.Co. Inſt. 1. 131. a. 4.1. A materiall Variance between a Protection,Protection. and thVide 40. 53.167. Contrariety and Repugnancy. And therefore,Libera Eleemoſina.Co. Inſt. 1. 97. a.1. I168. It will not drive a man to juſtifie or ſhew that, which he goeth about to defeate, or which mak169. Non poteſt adduci exceptio ejuſdem rei, cujus petitur diſſolutio.Taile diſcontinued.1. If Tenan170. None ſhall take exception to an Error or Act, which operateth to his own advantage.Co. l. 3. 69171 Nemo tenetur armare adverſarium ſuum contraſe.Challenge.1 He that challengeth a Iuror for the hu172 It favoureth Diligence; And therefore hateth Folly and Negligence.Waſte,1 Waſte may be done in h173 Negligentia ſemper habet infortunium Comitem.Laches.1. Regularly,Co. Inſt. pars 1. 246. b. 2. no174 Vigilantibus non Dormientibus Leges ſubveniunt.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. b. 1.1 At the Common Law u175 It favoureth ſpeeding of mens Cauſes; And thereforeProtections,1 In antient time,Co. Inſt. pars 176 Hateth Delayes.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. b. 41 Some ſay, that the demandant in a writ of Dower,Dower177 Unneceſſary Circumſtances; And therefore, Fruſtrafit per plura, quod fieri poteſt per Pauciora.T178 Expedit Reipublicae, ut ſit finis Litium.1 Regularly, an Abbot, Prior, Biſhop,Abbot. Annuity. or179 Circuit of Action.Co. Inſt. part 1. 265. a. 3.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 446. If the father be diſſei180 Matter of Vexation; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 127. a. 1.1 If the demandant or plaintif be n181 Pendente Lite nihil innovetur.Quar• Imped•t.1 At the Common Law,Co. Inſt. part 1. 344. b. 3. if 182 Infiniteneſs and multiplicity of ſutes.Co. Inſt. part 1. 56. a. 2. Co. l. 5. 73. a. 3. in Willia183 The Law conſtrueth things with Equity and Moderation.Convenient time.1 In 18 E. 4. 22.Co. l. 3. 184 Reſtraineth a general Act or Rule, and (ſometimes alſo) a Particular contract, if there be found185 Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.App•al. Indictment.1 Wetherol brings an appeal of murder agai186 It flyeth and preventeth all occaſions of Evill.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 88. b. 1. Littl. §. 123.1 The 187 It moderateth the ſtrictneſs of the Law it ſelf.Co. I ſt. part 1 13. •. 1.1 A Protection Moratur188 Verba ſemper accipienda ſunt in mitiori ſenſu.Slander.1 If one ſay to another, that he is perjur189. Conſtrueth things according to Common poſſibility or intendment; And thereforeJudges.1 Regularl190 Stabit praeſumptio donec probetur in Contrarium.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 222. b. 3. 34 Aſſ. pl. 1.1 If 191 Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Jura adaptantur.Co. Inſt. part l. 238. a. 2.1 It is ſaid,Deſcen192 Frequentia Actus multum operatur.Fine. Non-claim.1 A. poſſeſſed of divers lands in D. for years,193 It alwayes conſtrueth things to the Beſt; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 87. b. 3.1 If a man be 194 Every Act to be lawfull, when it ſtandeth indifferent, whether it ſhould be lawfull, or not.Co. 195 Non praeſtat impedimentum, quod de Jure non ſortitur effectum. Vide 195, 13.Baſtard eigne & Muli196 Praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.Co. l. 11 88. b. 1 in the caſe of Monopolies.1 The 197 The Law favoureth things for the Common-wealth.Incapable Officers.1 If an Office either of the g198 Publique Commerce. Vide ſupra 198, 31.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 2. b. 2.1 If an Alien take a leaſe for y199 Honor and Order.Tenant by Curteſie.1 A man ſhall be tenant by the Curteſie of an houſe,Co. Inſt.200 Publique quiet.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 5. a. 3.1 No Subject can build a Caſtle or houſe of ſtrength im201 Conventio ſeu beneficium privatorum non poteſt publico juri derogare. Vide ſupra 198, 29.Co. Inſ202 Minime mutanda ſunt, quae certam habuerunt interpretationem. Vide Max. 201. per tout.Co. Inſt. p203 A Communi Obſervantia non eſt recedendum.Littl §. 371. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 229 b 4. Vide Max. 203.204 Eventus varios Res nova ſemper habet; And therefore it hateth new Inventions, and Innovations.Co205 Communis Error facit Jus.Co. Inſt. 1. 52. b. 2.1 In a deed of feoffment beginning with Omnibus C206 So doth a Cuſtom, which is reaſonable: unreaſonable, contra.Co. Inſt. •pars 1. 59 b. 41 Of fines207 Licet Conſuetudo ſit magnae Authoritatis, Nunquam tamen Praejudicat manifeſtae veritati.Co. l. 4208 Husband and wife are one Perſon, And thereforeRebutter.1 If a feme heir of a diſſeiſor enfeoff m209 The Wife is of the ſame Condition with her Husband.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 16. b. 3. & Co. l. 4 118 b.210 They cannot ſue one another, nor make any grant one to the other, or the like.Baron cannot g•a• 211 Upon a joynt Purchaſe during the Coverture, either of them taketh the whole.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 55212 The Husband is the Womans head; And thereforeHomage by Baron and feme.1 The husband and wife doi213 All that ſhe hath is her Husbands. Vide Ho. 216.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 112. a. 4.1 Omnia, quae ſunt u214. Her will ought to become his will, and to be ſubject unto it.Co. Inſt pars 1. 112. b. 1.1. The 
1. II Maximes of Reaſon: taken from GRAMMAR.
1 Summa Ratio eſt, quae pro Religione facit. It is the highe Reaſon that makes for Religion.Statutes2 Nunquam proſperè ſuccedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Humane Affairs never ſucceed wellPriſot.3 To ſuch Lawes as have warrant in holy Scripture, our Law giveth credence, & contra.Co. Inſt4 The Juriſdiction of the Eccleſiaſtical Law, ought to be bounded by the Common Law.Spiritual Laws.15 Dies Dominicus non eſt juridicus.The Lords day.1 In all the four terms the Lords day is not Dies j6 Gravius eſt divinam quam Temporalem laedere majeſtatem.Co. l. 11. 29. b. Poulters caſe.1 Regularly7 The Law disfavoureth an excomunicate perſon.Excommunication. Jury.1 It is a good plea in abatement8 The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymologie of words, and in the Conſtruction of them, 9 In Conjunctivis oportet utrumque,Bract. l. 2. fol. 19. a. in disjunctivis ſufficit alteram partem 10 Words in conſtruction muſt be referred to the next antecedent, where the matter it ſelfe doth not11 The Law delighteth in apt expreſſions.Co. Inſt. pars 1 302. a.1 Whenſoever a Confirmation doth en12 Nomina ſi neſcis perit cognitio rerum.Co. Inſt. 1. 68. b1 Right Interpretations and Etymologies a13 Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 146 b. & 223. b1 Sir Edward Cooke obſerves, 14 Qui haeret in littera haeret in Cortice. Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. &c.1 Although by the words of the S15 Talis interpretatio fienda eſt, ut evitetur abſurdum & inconveniens, & ne judicium ſit illuſorium16 Quoties in verbis nulla eſt ambiguitas, ibi nulla expoſitio contra verba expreſſa fienda eſt.Co. 17 Maledicta eſt expoſitio, quae corrumpit textum.Co. l. 2. 24. a. Baldwins Caſe1 The Earl of Cumber18 Nimia ſubtilitas in lege reprobatur.Co. l. 5. 121. a. Longs caſe.1 Exception was taken to an Indi19 Ceſſante cauſa ceſſat effectus.The Corporation failing, the land reveſts in the Donor.IF Land hol20 Remoto impedimento emergit actio, & contra.Co. Inſt. pars 1 128. b. 2.1 If the defendant plead an21 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the cauſe thereof. Vide 31. 9.Tenant by courteſ22 Cujus eſt dare ejus eſt diſponere.A proviſo imports a condition.1 A. bargaines and ſels the Manno23 Ultra poſſe non eſt eſſe, & Vice Verſa.Co. l. 6 58. a. 4. in Bredimaus Caſe.1 A Right (without an24 Nemo poteſt plus juris ad alium transferre quàm ipſe habet.Co. Inſt. pars 1 265. a. 2. Littl. § 425 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the beginning of them. Vide Max. 63. 21.Privile26 A derived power cannot be greater than that, from which it is derived. Derivata poteſtas non pote27 Things are diſſolved, as they be contracted. Unum quodque diſſolvitur eo modo, quo colligatum eſt28 Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection.Co. Inſt. pars 1 19 a. 429 Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.Where there can be no preſentment by lapſe.1 If the Bi30 He that claimeth Paramount a thing, ſhall never take benefit, nor hurt by it.Dos de dote peti non31 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundam ſubiectam materiam.Account by the Guardian.1 It hath béen a 32 According to the end.Knight-ſervice the defence of the Realm.1 The Tenant in Knight-ſervice,Co. I33 Qui adimit medium di rimit finem.Littl. § 237.1 Reſcous, Replevin,Diſſeſin of re•• and Incloſure 34 According to the effect.1 H. 6. 4. Finch 59.1 A Déed delivered by an Infant,Delivery of a deed. c35. He that cannot have or performe the effect or conſequence of a thing, ſhall not have the thing i36 Non officit conatus, niſi ſequatur effectus.Inheritances depend not upon uncertaine words.1 In Si37 Acta exteriora indicant interiora Secreta.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 257. b. 1. 10 H. 7, 12.1 One may comm38 Inutilis labor & ſine fructu, non eſt effectus Legis, & contra: And therefore nothing can be give39 Lex non Praecipit inutilia: Vide M. 177. 5.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 389. b. 3. Littl. § 743.1 If Tenant 40 Where the foundation faileth, all goeth to the ground, Debile fundamentum fallit opus, & contrà.•41 Things incident are adhaerent to their Superiours, or Principals.Deeds, &c. in whoſe cuſtody to r42 Quod tacitè intelligitur, deeſſe non videtur. V. 64. 11.•opiholds.1 When cuſtome hath once create43 Things by reaſon of another are in the ſame plight.Poſſeſſio fratris.1 Albeit the Maxime in Law b44 Perſonal things cannot be done by another.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 66. b. 3.1 A ſingle Corporation conſi45 They cannot be granted or transferred over, as matters of pleaſure, eaſe, truſt, and authority.To46 They being once ſuſpended, or diſcharged for a time, are for ever after extinct.Pl. Co. 36. a. 3.47 They dye with the perſon.•ſte.1 If the Tenant doth Waſte, and he in the reverſion dieth,Co. Inſt.48 Things do enure diverſly according to the diverſity of the time.Purchaſe by Inhabitants.1 The Par49 Quod prius eſt tempore, potius eſt jure. Vide Max. 62. Pl. 10. 19.•emitter.1 One of the reaſons o50 According to the diverſity of the ſame perſon.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 8. a. 1. in Calvins caſe. Co. ib.51 According to the diverſity of ſeverall perſons. Vide infrà, 86.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 46. a. 3.1 If Te52 Relation is of great force in Law.•nceſtor and •eir; and the •eſtator, and •xecutor Cor••laiiva.153 Verba poſteriora propter certitu•inem addita, ad priora, quae certitudine indigent, ſunt referend54 No man can do an act to himſelf.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 38. b. 4. & 39 a. 4.1 A Feme Guardian in Soccag55 The Law favoureth privity. Vide Max. 47. 16.Co. Inſt. pars 1 28. a. 2.1 Tenant in tail after poſſ56 Equal things cannot drown one another, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1 273. b. 3.1 If a man make a leaſ57 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundum aequalitatem rationis.Finch 20. Bract. l. 1. c. 3.1 This Rul58. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, eſt puniendus.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 233. b. 2.1 If a Keeper of59 Omne majus continet in ſe minus.Co. Inſt. pars 1 44 b. 1.1 Albeit by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 160 Additio probat minoritatem.•e is Fee-••mple.1 When you finde it ſaid in any Book,Co. Inſt. pars 161 A matter of higher nature determineth a matter of lower nature, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 83. a.62 The more worthy thing draweth unto it things of leſſe worthineſſe.Finch, 23.1 The body of a man i63 Acceſſarium Sequitur Principale.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 49. a. 3.1 If an houſe or land belong to an Off64 Things acceſſary are of the nature of the Principal.40 Aſſ. Pl. 25.1 A ſervant procureth another 65 A mans own words are void, when the Law ſpeaketh as much, or otherwiſe. Vide M. 41. 6, 7, 9.New i66 Expreſsio eorum, quae tacitè inſunt nihil operatur.•pon the Qu. •ant of the •verſion, de•and muſt67 Parte quacunque integrante ſublata, tollitur totum.Co. l. 3. 41. a. 3. in Ratcliffs caſe.1 Lands 68 Ex tota materia emergat Reſolutio.Co. l. 3. 59. b. 1. in Lincoln Colledg caſe.1 It is the office 69 Partes ſimul ſumptae componunt totum: & Totum comprehendit ſuas partes.••int grants •aſſe all.1 W70 Intire things cannot be ſevered.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. a. 1. and 164. b. 3.1 Of Inheritances that 71 Argumentum à Diviſione eſt fortiſsimum in Lege.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 213. b. 3.1 An example or two of t72 The Generals muſt go before, and the Specials muſt follow after.•enerals be•e Specials.1 In a wri73 The more worthy ſhall be ſet before the leſſer worthy.•grees of •hineſs of •d, &c.1 An intire thi74 Sicut natura non facit ſaltum, Ita nec Lex.•der in writs1 In writs of Entry ſur diſſeiſin, if the75 A digniori fieri debet Denominatio & Reſolutio.Quod ei de•rceat for te•ant in Dow•r and by the •o76 The Law requireth decencie and order.The Homager muſt ſeek his Lord.1 The tenant ought to ſéek th77 Negatio Concluſionis eſt error in Lege.Co. l. 10. a. 4. in Priddle and Nappers Caſe.1 In Attachme78 The Law reſpecteth the Bonds of Nature.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 78. a. 2.1 If before the Statutes of 32 & 79 Nemo praeſumitur alienam poſteritatem ſuae praetuliſſe.Collaterall Warrantie.1 If the Tenant in t80 The Law eſteemeth and judgeth of all things according to their nature and quality.Co. Inſt. p. 1.81 In perſons, the Law looketh at the excellency of ſome, and giveth them ſingular Priviledges, and 82 Likewiſe the Law giveth greater priviledges to men, then to Women.Wardſhip, •ody, Father, •ot Mot83 The Law tendreth the weakneſſe and debility of other perſons, as thoſe out of the Realme, in Priſ84 The Law (in ſome Caſes) tendreth the ignorance of men un-lettered.7 E. 3. 9. Co. Inſt. P. 1. 301.85 The Law favoureth Strangers, that are neither parties nor privies.•ord. Tenant. •eofment •pon Con86 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, ſed quando que prodeſſe poteſt. Vide ſupra, Max. 5187 Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 145. b. 3.1 In a Replevin,Replevin. the Defendant88 The Law favoureth things done in anothers Right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 52. a. 2.1 Few or no perſons are 89 The Law diſ-favoureth other perſons, as Villeins, Bond-men, Out-lawes, Ex-leges, men in Exile, Al
    _ 90 As concerning the ages of Infants, the Law ordereth them in this manner;
Seven, for the Lord to have aid for the marriage of his eldeſt daughter of that age.Nine,Litt. §. 36. for a woman to deſerve her Dower.Twelve for a man to take the Oath of Allegiance in a Turn or Leet; and alſo to binde a woman in matter of Marriage.Fourteen, the age of diſcretion; and therefore that a competent age to binde the man in matter of Marriage, for a Ward in Soccage to chuſe his Guardian, and for a woman to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.Fifteen, for the Lord to have Aid to make his eldeſt Son (of that a•e) a Knight.Seventeen, for an Infant Executor to be out of the tuition of Adminiſtrators.Eighteen, for an Infant to have power to make a Will.One and twenty, their full age to make good any Act they do, and for a man to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.
91 In things, the Law reſpecteth every thing, according to Worthineſſe.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 2. If a92 The Law reſpecteth life and liberty moſt, and the Perſon above his poſſeſſions.•e Lords 〈◊〉 ſtati93 Things in the Realty more then thoſe in the Perſonalty.In waſte, the place waſted • more reſpect 94 Freehold and Inheritance more then it doth Chattels.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 3. a. 2.1 The Pariſhioners or95 Matter of Record more then other tranſactions.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 161. a. 3.1 There is a diverſity be96 Conveyances by Livery, or which paſſe Eſtates of the Land, more then thoſe that paſſe by Grant, o97 A matter in the right, more then a matter in poſſeſſion.Fore-judger •f Meſne.1 If the tenant be d98 Yet it favoureth Poſſeſſion, where the right is equal.Happe the •ardſhip.1 If a man purchaſeth at99 The Law reſpecteth matters of profit, and Intereſt, largely; Of pleaſure, skill, eaſe, truſt auth100 And therefore theſe may be countermanded, ſo cannot thoſe.An office without profit diſcharged, w101 Matter of ſubſtance more then matter of circumſtance.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 114. b. 2.1 In a writ of Me102 Yet for memory and ſolemnity ſubſtances are to be-expreſt under Ceremonies.〈◊〉 actions de•ce muſ103 Things executed and done more, then executorie, and to do. Vide 40. 51.•ery in 〈◊〉 without •y vo104 Poſſibility of things.•ſibility if ••riage.1 If Lands be given to a man and a woman un-married,C105 And therefore nothing to be void, which by poſſibility may be good.1 Vide ſupra R. 104. e. 1.Co.106 Id certum eſt, quod certum reddi poteſt.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 96. a. 2.1 If a man hold of his Lord by 107 Res non per ſe invicem, ſed per pecuniam eſtimantur, & non pecunia per Res.Diverſity of a Condit108 It favoureth mutual Recompence.Fee-ſimple without the •ord Heires.1 Vpon partition betwéen Copar109 De minimis non curat Lex.Co. l. 5. 56. b. 3. Knights Caſe.1 In Office by commiſſion under the Ex110 In Actions the Law yeeldeth favour, when for the doing of them there is, 1 Neceſsity.Co. Inſt. p111. 2 Conveniencie.Co. l. 9. 49. a. b. The Earl of Shrewsburies Caſe. Vide Max. 184 cap. 5.1 If a P112. 3 Conformity.••dowment •••ium.1 In ancient time when a man did endow his Wife ad oſtium Eccleſi113. 4 Colour.•o diſcent to 〈◊〉 away en•y.1 If a man ſeiſed of Land hath iſſue two Sonnes, and die ſ114 It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law more then thoſe, that are done by the party.Co. Inſt. 115 Utique fortior, eſt diſpoſitio Legis, quam hominis.Co. Inſt. p. 1 310. a. 1. & •87 b. 2.1 If a r116. It reputeth that a man will deal for their own beſt advantage.•••neſſe.1 Vpon this ground it is117 And therefore the Law believeth againſt the party whatſoever is to his prejudice.Co. Inſt. p: 1.118 When ſeveral remedies are given, the party, to whom the Law giveth them, hath thereby alſo elect119 Cujus eſt diviſio, alterius eſt Electio.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 166. b. 2. & Litt. §. 245.1 Vpon partiti120 Nemo prohibetur pluribus deſenſionibus uti.•ral Pleas 〈◊〉.1 Where the Tenant or Demandant may pl121 Conſenſus tollit Errorem.When by conſent no challenge.1 When in a writ of right the Iury, that a122 Volenti non fit injuria.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 368. a. 2. Litt. §. 701. Pl. Com. 91. the Parſon of Hony123 Quilibet poteſt renunciare juri per ſe introducto.••main.1 Land may be amortified by Licences gr124 Omnis Ratihabitio retró-trahitur, & mandato ſeu licentiae aequiparatur.••gageor & •rtgagee.1 If 125 Nemo tenetur accuſare ſeipſum.Co. Inſt. p. 1 158. b. 1.1 In trial of Challenges,Challenge of a J126 Nec ſe infortuniis & periculis exponere.1 In making continual claime, if the adverſe party lie iFor the time of doing things it countenanceth more. 127 Things done in time of Peace, than in time o128 Things done in the day more then thoſe done in the night.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 135. a. 4. Mirr. l. 5. When things are fit to be ſtraightned to a certaine time, it eſteemeth, according to the nature of t130 Sometimes a whole yeare.•• protection ••re a yeare.1 No protection either profecturae or moratur131 Sometimes the laſt part of the laſt day.Co Inſt. p. 1. 202. a. 2. Co l. 5. 114 b. 2 in Wades caſ132 When no time is limited, the Law appointeth the moſt convenient, and in ſome Caſes, the immediat133 The third offence is eſteemed moſt heynous.2 E. 4. 1.1 The third writ not returned by the Sherif134 The place alſo ought to be convenient.Litt. §. 180. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 120. a. 1.1 If a Villain pur 135 The Law favoureth Charity.••nder by any 〈◊〉 an Ideot.1 Vpon a Mortgage, if the Mortgageor die,C136 De mortuis nil niſi bonum.Littl. §. 399. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 244. a 3. Co. l. 8. 101: a. 3. in Sir R137 And therefore, it hateth malice and oppreſſion.••rious ap••l.1 The Common Law abhorre malice in 138 It favoureth Vertue.139 Hateth Vice.•••ition ••nful void.1 A Remainder may enure upon Condition 140 Intereſt Reipublicae, ne maleficia remaneant impunita.••feit in•• no good 〈◊〉.1 Where an Indictm141 It favoureth Juſtice and right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 33. a. 1.1 In a writ of Dower brought againſt the142 That, which is not tortious in it ſelfe, cannot be tortious to any.Co. lib. 11. 98. b. 1. in Edw143. Interest Reipublicae, ne Curia Domini Regis deficeret in Juſticia exhibenda.A Letter of Attorne144. It favoureth Common Right.…ment of ••wer.1. Dower being a thing due of Common right,Co. Inſt. p145. And therefore it ſuffereth things againſt principles of Law, rather then the party ſhould be wi146. It hateth Wrong.Diſparagement of the heir puniſhed.1.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 80. b. 2. The Law doth h147. So as none ſhall take benefit or advantage of their own wrong.Litt. S. 19. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 23148. And therefore the Law of it ſelf prejudiceth none.Diſtreſſe.1. Any goods may be diſtrained for 149.Vide M. 150. Ex. 9. Eſpecially for things that cannot be imputed to their own folly, or neglect.150. Nemo debet rem ſuam ſine facto vel def•ctu ſuo amittere.Litt. S. 442. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 262. b.151. It driveth not a man to ſhew, take notice of, or do that which by intendment he knoweth not, or152. Nor to do that, which were in vain for him to do.Litt. S. 103. Co. Inſt pars 1. 79. a. 2.1. If 153. Non licet, quod diſpendio licet.Surrenders.1. M. Leaſes for twenty one years to S. and is bound154. It favoreth Truth, Faith, and Certainty. Vide Max. 41. •9.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. a. 3.1. Regula255. It Disfavoureth Impoſſibilities.Co. Inſt. pars, 1. 25. b. 4.1. If Lands be given to a man and t156. Non cogit ad Impoſſibilia, & Impotentia excuſat Legem.Shewing a Deed.1. If a Deed remaine in on157. It disfavoureth Falſhood, Fraud, and Covin, Vide Dyer 294. 8.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 17. b. 3.1. A man 158. Jus & Fraus numquam Cohabitant.Co. l. 10. 45. a. 4. in Jennings his caſe.1. The Statute of 14 E159. Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur & per obliquum.Litt. S. 361. Co. Inſt. p160. Rectum est index ſui & Obliqui.Co. l. 10. 24. b. 2.1. In the Caſe of Suttons Hoſpitall Sir Edwa161. It disfavoureth Improbabilities.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l. 10. 50. b. 1. in Lampets caſe.162. Uncertainties, by which the truth may be inveigled.Villain.1. If a man do enfranchiſe a Villain163. Imperſonalitas non concludit nec ligat.Co. Inſt. 1. 352. b. 1. Pl. Co. 398. a. 1.1. An Eſtoppel164. Generale nihil certi implicat.Generall words.1.Co. Inſt. 1. 33. a. 3. Dodingtons caſe. If the K165. Doloſus verſatur in generalibus.Co. l. 3. 80. b. 4. Twines caſe.1. P. being indebted to T. in f166. Variance.Co. Inſt. 1. 131. a. 4.1. A materiall Variance between a Protection,Protection. and thVide 40. 53.167. Contrariety and Repugnancy. And therefore,Libera Eleemoſina.Co. Inſt. 1. 97. a.1. I168. It will not drive a man to juſtifie or ſhew that, which he goeth about to defeate, or which mak169. Non poteſt adduci exceptio ejuſdem rei, cujus petitur diſſolutio.Taile diſcontinued.1. If Tenan170. None ſhall take exception to an Error or Act, which operateth to his own advantage.Co. l. 3. 69171 Nemo tenetur armare adverſarium ſuum contraſe.Challenge.1 He that challengeth a Iuror for the hu172 It favoureth Diligence; And therefore hateth Folly and Negligence.Waſte,1 Waſte may be done in h173 Negligentia ſemper habet infortunium Comitem.Laches.1. Regularly,Co. Inſt. pars 1. 246. b. 2. no174 Vigilantibus non Dormientibus Leges ſubveniunt.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. b. 1.1 At the Common Law u175 It favoureth ſpeeding of mens Cauſes; And thereforeProtections,1 In antient time,Co. Inſt. pars 176 Hateth Delayes.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. b. 41 Some ſay, that the demandant in a writ of Dower,Dower177 Unneceſſary Circumſtances; And therefore, Fruſtrafit per plura, quod fieri poteſt per Pauciora.T178 Expedit Reipublicae, ut ſit finis Litium.1 Regularly, an Abbot, Prior, Biſhop,Abbot. Annuity. or179 Circuit of Action.Co. Inſt. part 1. 265. a. 3.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 446. If the father be diſſei180 Matter of Vexation; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 127. a. 1.1 If the demandant or plaintif be n181 Pendente Lite nihil innovetur.Quar• Imped•t.1 At the Common Law,Co. Inſt. part 1. 344. b. 3. if 182 Infiniteneſs and multiplicity of ſutes.Co. Inſt. part 1. 56. a. 2. Co. l. 5. 73. a. 3. in Willia183 The Law conſtrueth things with Equity and Moderation.Convenient time.1 In 18 E. 4. 22.Co. l. 3. 184 Reſtraineth a general Act or Rule, and (ſometimes alſo) a Particular contract, if there be found185 Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.App•al. Indictment.1 Wetherol brings an appeal of murder agai186 It flyeth and preventeth all occaſions of Evill.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 88. b. 1. Littl. §. 123.1 The 187 It moderateth the ſtrictneſs of the Law it ſelf.Co. I ſt. part 1 13. •. 1.1 A Protection Moratur188 Verba ſemper accipienda ſunt in mitiori ſenſu.Slander.1 If one ſay to another, that he is perjur189. Conſtrueth things according to Common poſſibility or intendment; And thereforeJudges.1 Regularl190 Stabit praeſumptio donec probetur in Contrarium.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 222. b. 3. 34 Aſſ. pl. 1.1 If 191 Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Jura adaptantur.Co. Inſt. part l. 238. a. 2.1 It is ſaid,Deſcen192 Frequentia Actus multum operatur.Fine. Non-claim.1 A. poſſeſſed of divers lands in D. for years,193 It alwayes conſtrueth things to the Beſt; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 87. b. 3.1 If a man be 194 Every Act to be lawfull, when it ſtandeth indifferent, whether it ſhould be lawfull, or not.Co. 195 Non praeſtat impedimentum, quod de Jure non ſortitur effectum. Vide 195, 13.Baſtard eigne & Muli196 Praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.Co. l. 11 88. b. 1 in the caſe of Monopolies.1 The 197 The Law favoureth things for the Common-wealth.Incapable Officers.1 If an Office either of the g198 Publique Commerce. Vide ſupra 198, 31.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 2. b. 2.1 If an Alien take a leaſe for y199 Honor and Order.Tenant by Curteſie.1 A man ſhall be tenant by the Curteſie of an houſe,Co. Inſt.200 Publique quiet.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 5. a. 3.1 No Subject can build a Caſtle or houſe of ſtrength im201 Conventio ſeu beneficium privatorum non poteſt publico juri derogare. Vide ſupra 198, 29.Co. Inſ202 Minime mutanda ſunt, quae certam habuerunt interpretationem. Vide Max. 201. per tout.Co. Inſt. p203 A Communi Obſervantia non eſt recedendum.Littl §. 371. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 229 b 4. Vide Max. 203.204 Eventus varios Res nova ſemper habet; And therefore it hateth new Inventions, and Innovations.Co205 Communis Error facit Jus.Co. Inſt. 1. 52. b. 2.1 In a deed of feoffment beginning with Omnibus C206 So doth a Cuſtom, which is reaſonable: unreaſonable, contra.Co. Inſt. •pars 1. 59 b. 41 Of fines207 Licet Conſuetudo ſit magnae Authoritatis, Nunquam tamen Praejudicat manifeſtae veritati.Co. l. 4208 Husband and wife are one Perſon, And thereforeRebutter.1 If a feme heir of a diſſeiſor enfeoff m209 The Wife is of the ſame Condition with her Husband.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 16. b. 3. & Co. l. 4 118 b.210 They cannot ſue one another, nor make any grant one to the other, or the like.Baron cannot g•a• 211 Upon a joynt Purchaſe during the Coverture, either of them taketh the whole.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 55212 The Husband is the Womans head; And thereforeHomage by Baron and feme.1 The husband and wife doi213 All that ſhe hath is her Husbands. Vide Ho. 216.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 112. a. 4.1 Omnia, quae ſunt u214. Her will ought to become his will, and to be ſubject unto it.Co. Inſt pars 1. 112. b. 1.1. The 
1. III Maximes of Reaſon: taken out of LOGICKE.
1 Summa Ratio eſt, quae pro Religione facit. It is the highe Reaſon that makes for Religion.Statutes2 Nunquam proſperè ſuccedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Humane Affairs never ſucceed wellPriſot.3 To ſuch Lawes as have warrant in holy Scripture, our Law giveth credence, & contra.Co. Inſt4 The Juriſdiction of the Eccleſiaſtical Law, ought to be bounded by the Common Law.Spiritual Laws.15 Dies Dominicus non eſt juridicus.The Lords day.1 In all the four terms the Lords day is not Dies j6 Gravius eſt divinam quam Temporalem laedere majeſtatem.Co. l. 11. 29. b. Poulters caſe.1 Regularly7 The Law disfavoureth an excomunicate perſon.Excommunication. Jury.1 It is a good plea in abatement8 The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymologie of words, and in the Conſtruction of them, 9 In Conjunctivis oportet utrumque,Bract. l. 2. fol. 19. a. in disjunctivis ſufficit alteram partem 10 Words in conſtruction muſt be referred to the next antecedent, where the matter it ſelfe doth not11 The Law delighteth in apt expreſſions.Co. Inſt. pars 1 302. a.1 Whenſoever a Confirmation doth en12 Nomina ſi neſcis perit cognitio rerum.Co. Inſt. 1. 68. b1 Right Interpretations and Etymologies a13 Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 146 b. & 223. b1 Sir Edward Cooke obſerves, 14 Qui haeret in littera haeret in Cortice. Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. &c.1 Although by the words of the S15 Talis interpretatio fienda eſt, ut evitetur abſurdum & inconveniens, & ne judicium ſit illuſorium16 Quoties in verbis nulla eſt ambiguitas, ibi nulla expoſitio contra verba expreſſa fienda eſt.Co. 17 Maledicta eſt expoſitio, quae corrumpit textum.Co. l. 2. 24. a. Baldwins Caſe1 The Earl of Cumber18 Nimia ſubtilitas in lege reprobatur.Co. l. 5. 121. a. Longs caſe.1 Exception was taken to an Indi19 Ceſſante cauſa ceſſat effectus.The Corporation failing, the land reveſts in the Donor.IF Land hol20 Remoto impedimento emergit actio, & contra.Co. Inſt. pars 1 128. b. 2.1 If the defendant plead an21 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the cauſe thereof. Vide 31. 9.Tenant by courteſ22 Cujus eſt dare ejus eſt diſponere.A proviſo imports a condition.1 A. bargaines and ſels the Manno23 Ultra poſſe non eſt eſſe, & Vice Verſa.Co. l. 6 58. a. 4. in Bredimaus Caſe.1 A Right (without an24 Nemo poteſt plus juris ad alium transferre quàm ipſe habet.Co. Inſt. pars 1 265. a. 2. Littl. § 425 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the beginning of them. Vide Max. 63. 21.Privile26 A derived power cannot be greater than that, from which it is derived. Derivata poteſtas non pote27 Things are diſſolved, as they be contracted. Unum quodque diſſolvitur eo modo, quo colligatum eſt28 Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection.Co. Inſt. pars 1 19 a. 429 Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.Where there can be no preſentment by lapſe.1 If the Bi30 He that claimeth Paramount a thing, ſhall never take benefit, nor hurt by it.Dos de dote peti non31 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundam ſubiectam materiam.Account by the Guardian.1 It hath béen a 32 According to the end.Knight-ſervice the defence of the Realm.1 The Tenant in Knight-ſervice,Co. I33 Qui adimit medium di rimit finem.Littl. § 237.1 Reſcous, Replevin,Diſſeſin of re•• and Incloſure 34 According to the effect.1 H. 6. 4. Finch 59.1 A Déed delivered by an Infant,Delivery of a deed. c35. He that cannot have or performe the effect or conſequence of a thing, ſhall not have the thing i36 Non officit conatus, niſi ſequatur effectus.Inheritances depend not upon uncertaine words.1 In Si37 Acta exteriora indicant interiora Secreta.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 257. b. 1. 10 H. 7, 12.1 One may comm38 Inutilis labor & ſine fructu, non eſt effectus Legis, & contra: And therefore nothing can be give39 Lex non Praecipit inutilia: Vide M. 177. 5.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 389. b. 3. Littl. § 743.1 If Tenant 40 Where the foundation faileth, all goeth to the ground, Debile fundamentum fallit opus, & contrà.•41 Things incident are adhaerent to their Superiours, or Principals.Deeds, &c. in whoſe cuſtody to r42 Quod tacitè intelligitur, deeſſe non videtur. V. 64. 11.•opiholds.1 When cuſtome hath once create43 Things by reaſon of another are in the ſame plight.Poſſeſſio fratris.1 Albeit the Maxime in Law b44 Perſonal things cannot be done by another.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 66. b. 3.1 A ſingle Corporation conſi45 They cannot be granted or transferred over, as matters of pleaſure, eaſe, truſt, and authority.To46 They being once ſuſpended, or diſcharged for a time, are for ever after extinct.Pl. Co. 36. a. 3.47 They dye with the perſon.•ſte.1 If the Tenant doth Waſte, and he in the reverſion dieth,Co. Inſt.48 Things do enure diverſly according to the diverſity of the time.Purchaſe by Inhabitants.1 The Par49 Quod prius eſt tempore, potius eſt jure. Vide Max. 62. Pl. 10. 19.•emitter.1 One of the reaſons o50 According to the diverſity of the ſame perſon.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 8. a. 1. in Calvins caſe. Co. ib.51 According to the diverſity of ſeverall perſons. Vide infrà, 86.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 46. a. 3.1 If Te52 Relation is of great force in Law.•nceſtor and •eir; and the •eſtator, and •xecutor Cor••laiiva.153 Verba poſteriora propter certitu•inem addita, ad priora, quae certitudine indigent, ſunt referend54 No man can do an act to himſelf.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 38. b. 4. & 39 a. 4.1 A Feme Guardian in Soccag55 The Law favoureth privity. Vide Max. 47. 16.Co. Inſt. pars 1 28. a. 2.1 Tenant in tail after poſſ56 Equal things cannot drown one another, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1 273. b. 3.1 If a man make a leaſ57 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundum aequalitatem rationis.Finch 20. Bract. l. 1. c. 3.1 This Rul58. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, eſt puniendus.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 233. b. 2.1 If a Keeper of59 Omne majus continet in ſe minus.Co. Inſt. pars 1 44 b. 1.1 Albeit by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 160 Additio probat minoritatem.•e is Fee-••mple.1 When you finde it ſaid in any Book,Co. Inſt. pars 161 A matter of higher nature determineth a matter of lower nature, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 83. a.62 The more worthy thing draweth unto it things of leſſe worthineſſe.Finch, 23.1 The body of a man i63 Acceſſarium Sequitur Principale.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 49. a. 3.1 If an houſe or land belong to an Off64 Things acceſſary are of the nature of the Principal.40 Aſſ. Pl. 25.1 A ſervant procureth another 65 A mans own words are void, when the Law ſpeaketh as much, or otherwiſe. Vide M. 41. 6, 7, 9.New i66 Expreſsio eorum, quae tacitè inſunt nihil operatur.•pon the Qu. •ant of the •verſion, de•and muſt67 Parte quacunque integrante ſublata, tollitur totum.Co. l. 3. 41. a. 3. in Ratcliffs caſe.1 Lands 68 Ex tota materia emergat Reſolutio.Co. l. 3. 59. b. 1. in Lincoln Colledg caſe.1 It is the office 69 Partes ſimul ſumptae componunt totum: & Totum comprehendit ſuas partes.••int grants •aſſe all.1 W70 Intire things cannot be ſevered.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. a. 1. and 164. b. 3.1 Of Inheritances that 71 Argumentum à Diviſione eſt fortiſsimum in Lege.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 213. b. 3.1 An example or two of t72 The Generals muſt go before, and the Specials muſt follow after.•enerals be•e Specials.1 In a wri73 The more worthy ſhall be ſet before the leſſer worthy.•grees of •hineſs of •d, &c.1 An intire thi74 Sicut natura non facit ſaltum, Ita nec Lex.•der in writs1 In writs of Entry ſur diſſeiſin, if the75 A digniori fieri debet Denominatio & Reſolutio.Quod ei de•rceat for te•ant in Dow•r and by the •o76 The Law requireth decencie and order.The Homager muſt ſeek his Lord.1 The tenant ought to ſéek th77 Negatio Concluſionis eſt error in Lege.Co. l. 10. a. 4. in Priddle and Nappers Caſe.1 In Attachme78 The Law reſpecteth the Bonds of Nature.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 78. a. 2.1 If before the Statutes of 32 & 79 Nemo praeſumitur alienam poſteritatem ſuae praetuliſſe.Collaterall Warrantie.1 If the Tenant in t80 The Law eſteemeth and judgeth of all things according to their nature and quality.Co. Inſt. p. 1.81 In perſons, the Law looketh at the excellency of ſome, and giveth them ſingular Priviledges, and 82 Likewiſe the Law giveth greater priviledges to men, then to Women.Wardſhip, •ody, Father, •ot Mot83 The Law tendreth the weakneſſe and debility of other perſons, as thoſe out of the Realme, in Priſ84 The Law (in ſome Caſes) tendreth the ignorance of men un-lettered.7 E. 3. 9. Co. Inſt. P. 1. 301.85 The Law favoureth Strangers, that are neither parties nor privies.•ord. Tenant. •eofment •pon Con86 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, ſed quando que prodeſſe poteſt. Vide ſupra, Max. 5187 Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 145. b. 3.1 In a Replevin,Replevin. the Defendant88 The Law favoureth things done in anothers Right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 52. a. 2.1 Few or no perſons are 89 The Law diſ-favoureth other perſons, as Villeins, Bond-men, Out-lawes, Ex-leges, men in Exile, Al
    _ 90 As concerning the ages of Infants, the Law ordereth them in this manner;
Seven, for the Lord to have aid for the marriage of his eldeſt daughter of that age.Nine,Litt. §. 36. for a woman to deſerve her Dower.Twelve for a man to take the Oath of Allegiance in a Turn or Leet; and alſo to binde a woman in matter of Marriage.Fourteen, the age of diſcretion; and therefore that a competent age to binde the man in matter of Marriage, for a Ward in Soccage to chuſe his Guardian, and for a woman to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.Fifteen, for the Lord to have Aid to make his eldeſt Son (of that a•e) a Knight.Seventeen, for an Infant Executor to be out of the tuition of Adminiſtrators.Eighteen, for an Infant to have power to make a Will.One and twenty, their full age to make good any Act they do, and for a man to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.
91 In things, the Law reſpecteth every thing, according to Worthineſſe.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 2. If a92 The Law reſpecteth life and liberty moſt, and the Perſon above his poſſeſſions.•e Lords 〈◊〉 ſtati93 Things in the Realty more then thoſe in the Perſonalty.In waſte, the place waſted • more reſpect 94 Freehold and Inheritance more then it doth Chattels.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 3. a. 2.1 The Pariſhioners or95 Matter of Record more then other tranſactions.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 161. a. 3.1 There is a diverſity be96 Conveyances by Livery, or which paſſe Eſtates of the Land, more then thoſe that paſſe by Grant, o97 A matter in the right, more then a matter in poſſeſſion.Fore-judger •f Meſne.1 If the tenant be d98 Yet it favoureth Poſſeſſion, where the right is equal.Happe the •ardſhip.1 If a man purchaſeth at99 The Law reſpecteth matters of profit, and Intereſt, largely; Of pleaſure, skill, eaſe, truſt auth100 And therefore theſe may be countermanded, ſo cannot thoſe.An office without profit diſcharged, w101 Matter of ſubſtance more then matter of circumſtance.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 114. b. 2.1 In a writ of Me102 Yet for memory and ſolemnity ſubſtances are to be-expreſt under Ceremonies.〈◊〉 actions de•ce muſ103 Things executed and done more, then executorie, and to do. Vide 40. 51.•ery in 〈◊〉 without •y vo104 Poſſibility of things.•ſibility if ••riage.1 If Lands be given to a man and a woman un-married,C105 And therefore nothing to be void, which by poſſibility may be good.1 Vide ſupra R. 104. e. 1.Co.106 Id certum eſt, quod certum reddi poteſt.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 96. a. 2.1 If a man hold of his Lord by 107 Res non per ſe invicem, ſed per pecuniam eſtimantur, & non pecunia per Res.Diverſity of a Condit108 It favoureth mutual Recompence.Fee-ſimple without the •ord Heires.1 Vpon partition betwéen Copar109 De minimis non curat Lex.Co. l. 5. 56. b. 3. Knights Caſe.1 In Office by commiſſion under the Ex110 In Actions the Law yeeldeth favour, when for the doing of them there is, 1 Neceſsity.Co. Inſt. p111. 2 Conveniencie.Co. l. 9. 49. a. b. The Earl of Shrewsburies Caſe. Vide Max. 184 cap. 5.1 If a P112. 3 Conformity.••dowment •••ium.1 In ancient time when a man did endow his Wife ad oſtium Eccleſi113. 4 Colour.•o diſcent to 〈◊〉 away en•y.1 If a man ſeiſed of Land hath iſſue two Sonnes, and die ſ114 It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law more then thoſe, that are done by the party.Co. Inſt. 115 Utique fortior, eſt diſpoſitio Legis, quam hominis.Co. Inſt. p. 1 310. a. 1. & •87 b. 2.1 If a r116. It reputeth that a man will deal for their own beſt advantage.•••neſſe.1 Vpon this ground it is117 And therefore the Law believeth againſt the party whatſoever is to his prejudice.Co. Inſt. p: 1.118 When ſeveral remedies are given, the party, to whom the Law giveth them, hath thereby alſo elect119 Cujus eſt diviſio, alterius eſt Electio.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 166. b. 2. & Litt. §. 245.1 Vpon partiti120 Nemo prohibetur pluribus deſenſionibus uti.•ral Pleas 〈◊〉.1 Where the Tenant or Demandant may pl121 Conſenſus tollit Errorem.When by conſent no challenge.1 When in a writ of right the Iury, that a122 Volenti non fit injuria.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 368. a. 2. Litt. §. 701. Pl. Com. 91. the Parſon of Hony123 Quilibet poteſt renunciare juri per ſe introducto.••main.1 Land may be amortified by Licences gr124 Omnis Ratihabitio retró-trahitur, & mandato ſeu licentiae aequiparatur.••gageor & •rtgagee.1 If 125 Nemo tenetur accuſare ſeipſum.Co. Inſt. p. 1 158. b. 1.1 In trial of Challenges,Challenge of a J126 Nec ſe infortuniis & periculis exponere.1 In making continual claime, if the adverſe party lie iFor the time of doing things it countenanceth more. 127 Things done in time of Peace, than in time o128 Things done in the day more then thoſe done in the night.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 135. a. 4. Mirr. l. 5. When things are fit to be ſtraightned to a certaine time, it eſteemeth, according to the nature of t130 Sometimes a whole yeare.•• protection ••re a yeare.1 No protection either profecturae or moratur131 Sometimes the laſt part of the laſt day.Co Inſt. p. 1. 202. a. 2. Co l. 5. 114 b. 2 in Wades caſ132 When no time is limited, the Law appointeth the moſt convenient, and in ſome Caſes, the immediat133 The third offence is eſteemed moſt heynous.2 E. 4. 1.1 The third writ not returned by the Sherif134 The place alſo ought to be convenient.Litt. §. 180. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 120. a. 1.1 If a Villain pur 135 The Law favoureth Charity.••nder by any 〈◊〉 an Ideot.1 Vpon a Mortgage, if the Mortgageor die,C136 De mortuis nil niſi bonum.Littl. §. 399. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 244. a 3. Co. l. 8. 101: a. 3. in Sir R137 And therefore, it hateth malice and oppreſſion.••rious ap••l.1 The Common Law abhorre malice in 138 It favoureth Vertue.139 Hateth Vice.•••ition ••nful void.1 A Remainder may enure upon Condition 140 Intereſt Reipublicae, ne maleficia remaneant impunita.••feit in•• no good 〈◊〉.1 Where an Indictm141 It favoureth Juſtice and right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 33. a. 1.1 In a writ of Dower brought againſt the142 That, which is not tortious in it ſelfe, cannot be tortious to any.Co. lib. 11. 98. b. 1. in Edw143. Interest Reipublicae, ne Curia Domini Regis deficeret in Juſticia exhibenda.A Letter of Attorne144. It favoureth Common Right.…ment of ••wer.1. Dower being a thing due of Common right,Co. Inſt. p145. And therefore it ſuffereth things againſt principles of Law, rather then the party ſhould be wi146. It hateth Wrong.Diſparagement of the heir puniſhed.1.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 80. b. 2. The Law doth h147. So as none ſhall take benefit or advantage of their own wrong.Litt. S. 19. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 23148. And therefore the Law of it ſelf prejudiceth none.Diſtreſſe.1. Any goods may be diſtrained for 149.Vide M. 150. Ex. 9. Eſpecially for things that cannot be imputed to their own folly, or neglect.150. Nemo debet rem ſuam ſine facto vel def•ctu ſuo amittere.Litt. S. 442. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 262. b.151. It driveth not a man to ſhew, take notice of, or do that which by intendment he knoweth not, or152. Nor to do that, which were in vain for him to do.Litt. S. 103. Co. Inſt pars 1. 79. a. 2.1. If 153. Non licet, quod diſpendio licet.Surrenders.1. M. Leaſes for twenty one years to S. and is bound154. It favoreth Truth, Faith, and Certainty. Vide Max. 41. •9.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. a. 3.1. Regula255. It Disfavoureth Impoſſibilities.Co. Inſt. pars, 1. 25. b. 4.1. If Lands be given to a man and t156. Non cogit ad Impoſſibilia, & Impotentia excuſat Legem.Shewing a Deed.1. If a Deed remaine in on157. It disfavoureth Falſhood, Fraud, and Covin, Vide Dyer 294. 8.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 17. b. 3.1. A man 158. Jus & Fraus numquam Cohabitant.Co. l. 10. 45. a. 4. in Jennings his caſe.1. The Statute of 14 E159. Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur & per obliquum.Litt. S. 361. Co. Inſt. p160. Rectum est index ſui & Obliqui.Co. l. 10. 24. b. 2.1. In the Caſe of Suttons Hoſpitall Sir Edwa161. It disfavoureth Improbabilities.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l. 10. 50. b. 1. in Lampets caſe.162. Uncertainties, by which the truth may be inveigled.Villain.1. If a man do enfranchiſe a Villain163. Imperſonalitas non concludit nec ligat.Co. Inſt. 1. 352. b. 1. Pl. Co. 398. a. 1.1. An Eſtoppel164. Generale nihil certi implicat.Generall words.1.Co. Inſt. 1. 33. a. 3. Dodingtons caſe. If the K165. Doloſus verſatur in generalibus.Co. l. 3. 80. b. 4. Twines caſe.1. P. being indebted to T. in f166. Variance.Co. Inſt. 1. 131. a. 4.1. A materiall Variance between a Protection,Protection. and thVide 40. 53.167. Contrariety and Repugnancy. And therefore,Libera Eleemoſina.Co. Inſt. 1. 97. a.1. I168. It will not drive a man to juſtifie or ſhew that, which he goeth about to defeate, or which mak169. Non poteſt adduci exceptio ejuſdem rei, cujus petitur diſſolutio.Taile diſcontinued.1. If Tenan170. None ſhall take exception to an Error or Act, which operateth to his own advantage.Co. l. 3. 69171 Nemo tenetur armare adverſarium ſuum contraſe.Challenge.1 He that challengeth a Iuror for the hu172 It favoureth Diligence; And therefore hateth Folly and Negligence.Waſte,1 Waſte may be done in h173 Negligentia ſemper habet infortunium Comitem.Laches.1. Regularly,Co. Inſt. pars 1. 246. b. 2. no174 Vigilantibus non Dormientibus Leges ſubveniunt.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. b. 1.1 At the Common Law u175 It favoureth ſpeeding of mens Cauſes; And thereforeProtections,1 In antient time,Co. Inſt. pars 176 Hateth Delayes.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. b. 41 Some ſay, that the demandant in a writ of Dower,Dower177 Unneceſſary Circumſtances; And therefore, Fruſtrafit per plura, quod fieri poteſt per Pauciora.T178 Expedit Reipublicae, ut ſit finis Litium.1 Regularly, an Abbot, Prior, Biſhop,Abbot. Annuity. or179 Circuit of Action.Co. Inſt. part 1. 265. a. 3.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 446. If the father be diſſei180 Matter of Vexation; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 127. a. 1.1 If the demandant or plaintif be n181 Pendente Lite nihil innovetur.Quar• Imped•t.1 At the Common Law,Co. Inſt. part 1. 344. b. 3. if 182 Infiniteneſs and multiplicity of ſutes.Co. Inſt. part 1. 56. a. 2. Co. l. 5. 73. a. 3. in Willia183 The Law conſtrueth things with Equity and Moderation.Convenient time.1 In 18 E. 4. 22.Co. l. 3. 184 Reſtraineth a general Act or Rule, and (ſometimes alſo) a Particular contract, if there be found185 Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.App•al. Indictment.1 Wetherol brings an appeal of murder agai186 It flyeth and preventeth all occaſions of Evill.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 88. b. 1. Littl. §. 123.1 The 187 It moderateth the ſtrictneſs of the Law it ſelf.Co. I ſt. part 1 13. •. 1.1 A Protection Moratur188 Verba ſemper accipienda ſunt in mitiori ſenſu.Slander.1 If one ſay to another, that he is perjur189. Conſtrueth things according to Common poſſibility or intendment; And thereforeJudges.1 Regularl190 Stabit praeſumptio donec probetur in Contrarium.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 222. b. 3. 34 Aſſ. pl. 1.1 If 191 Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Jura adaptantur.Co. Inſt. part l. 238. a. 2.1 It is ſaid,Deſcen192 Frequentia Actus multum operatur.Fine. Non-claim.1 A. poſſeſſed of divers lands in D. for years,193 It alwayes conſtrueth things to the Beſt; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 87. b. 3.1 If a man be 194 Every Act to be lawfull, when it ſtandeth indifferent, whether it ſhould be lawfull, or not.Co. 195 Non praeſtat impedimentum, quod de Jure non ſortitur effectum. Vide 195, 13.Baſtard eigne & Muli196 Praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.Co. l. 11 88. b. 1 in the caſe of Monopolies.1 The 197 The Law favoureth things for the Common-wealth.Incapable Officers.1 If an Office either of the g198 Publique Commerce. Vide ſupra 198, 31.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 2. b. 2.1 If an Alien take a leaſe for y199 Honor and Order.Tenant by Curteſie.1 A man ſhall be tenant by the Curteſie of an houſe,Co. Inſt.200 Publique quiet.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 5. a. 3.1 No Subject can build a Caſtle or houſe of ſtrength im201 Conventio ſeu beneficium privatorum non poteſt publico juri derogare. Vide ſupra 198, 29.Co. Inſ202 Minime mutanda ſunt, quae certam habuerunt interpretationem. Vide Max. 201. per tout.Co. Inſt. p203 A Communi Obſervantia non eſt recedendum.Littl §. 371. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 229 b 4. Vide Max. 203.204 Eventus varios Res nova ſemper habet; And therefore it hateth new Inventions, and Innovations.Co205 Communis Error facit Jus.Co. Inſt. 1. 52. b. 2.1 In a deed of feoffment beginning with Omnibus C206 So doth a Cuſtom, which is reaſonable: unreaſonable, contra.Co. Inſt. •pars 1. 59 b. 41 Of fines207 Licet Conſuetudo ſit magnae Authoritatis, Nunquam tamen Praejudicat manifeſtae veritati.Co. l. 4208 Husband and wife are one Perſon, And thereforeRebutter.1 If a feme heir of a diſſeiſor enfeoff m209 The Wife is of the ſame Condition with her Husband.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 16. b. 3. & Co. l. 4 118 b.210 They cannot ſue one another, nor make any grant one to the other, or the like.Baron cannot g•a• 211 Upon a joynt Purchaſe during the Coverture, either of them taketh the whole.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 55212 The Husband is the Womans head; And thereforeHomage by Baron and feme.1 The husband and wife doi213 All that ſhe hath is her Husbands. Vide Ho. 216.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 112. a. 4.1 Omnia, quae ſunt u214. Her will ought to become his will, and to be ſubject unto it.Co. Inſt pars 1. 112. b. 1.1. The 
1. Maximes of Reaſon taken out of Morality.
1 Summa Ratio eſt, quae pro Religione facit. It is the highe Reaſon that makes for Religion.Statutes2 Nunquam proſperè ſuccedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Humane Affairs never ſucceed wellPriſot.3 To ſuch Lawes as have warrant in holy Scripture, our Law giveth credence, & contra.Co. Inſt4 The Juriſdiction of the Eccleſiaſtical Law, ought to be bounded by the Common Law.Spiritual Laws.15 Dies Dominicus non eſt juridicus.The Lords day.1 In all the four terms the Lords day is not Dies j6 Gravius eſt divinam quam Temporalem laedere majeſtatem.Co. l. 11. 29. b. Poulters caſe.1 Regularly7 The Law disfavoureth an excomunicate perſon.Excommunication. Jury.1 It is a good plea in abatement8 The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymologie of words, and in the Conſtruction of them, 9 In Conjunctivis oportet utrumque,Bract. l. 2. fol. 19. a. in disjunctivis ſufficit alteram partem 10 Words in conſtruction muſt be referred to the next antecedent, where the matter it ſelfe doth not11 The Law delighteth in apt expreſſions.Co. Inſt. pars 1 302. a.1 Whenſoever a Confirmation doth en12 Nomina ſi neſcis perit cognitio rerum.Co. Inſt. 1. 68. b1 Right Interpretations and Etymologies a13 Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 146 b. & 223. b1 Sir Edward Cooke obſerves, 14 Qui haeret in littera haeret in Cortice. Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. &c.1 Although by the words of the S15 Talis interpretatio fienda eſt, ut evitetur abſurdum & inconveniens, & ne judicium ſit illuſorium16 Quoties in verbis nulla eſt ambiguitas, ibi nulla expoſitio contra verba expreſſa fienda eſt.Co. 17 Maledicta eſt expoſitio, quae corrumpit textum.Co. l. 2. 24. a. Baldwins Caſe1 The Earl of Cumber18 Nimia ſubtilitas in lege reprobatur.Co. l. 5. 121. a. Longs caſe.1 Exception was taken to an Indi19 Ceſſante cauſa ceſſat effectus.The Corporation failing, the land reveſts in the Donor.IF Land hol20 Remoto impedimento emergit actio, & contra.Co. Inſt. pars 1 128. b. 2.1 If the defendant plead an21 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the cauſe thereof. Vide 31. 9.Tenant by courteſ22 Cujus eſt dare ejus eſt diſponere.A proviſo imports a condition.1 A. bargaines and ſels the Manno23 Ultra poſſe non eſt eſſe, & Vice Verſa.Co. l. 6 58. a. 4. in Bredimaus Caſe.1 A Right (without an24 Nemo poteſt plus juris ad alium transferre quàm ipſe habet.Co. Inſt. pars 1 265. a. 2. Littl. § 425 Things are conſtrued according to that, which was the beginning of them. Vide Max. 63. 21.Privile26 A derived power cannot be greater than that, from which it is derived. Derivata poteſtas non pote27 Things are diſſolved, as they be contracted. Unum quodque diſſolvitur eo modo, quo colligatum eſt28 Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection.Co. Inſt. pars 1 19 a. 429 Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.Where there can be no preſentment by lapſe.1 If the Bi30 He that claimeth Paramount a thing, ſhall never take benefit, nor hurt by it.Dos de dote peti non31 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundam ſubiectam materiam.Account by the Guardian.1 It hath béen a 32 According to the end.Knight-ſervice the defence of the Realm.1 The Tenant in Knight-ſervice,Co. I33 Qui adimit medium di rimit finem.Littl. § 237.1 Reſcous, Replevin,Diſſeſin of re•• and Incloſure 34 According to the effect.1 H. 6. 4. Finch 59.1 A Déed delivered by an Infant,Delivery of a deed. c35. He that cannot have or performe the effect or conſequence of a thing, ſhall not have the thing i36 Non officit conatus, niſi ſequatur effectus.Inheritances depend not upon uncertaine words.1 In Si37 Acta exteriora indicant interiora Secreta.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 257. b. 1. 10 H. 7, 12.1 One may comm38 Inutilis labor & ſine fructu, non eſt effectus Legis, & contra: And therefore nothing can be give39 Lex non Praecipit inutilia: Vide M. 177. 5.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 389. b. 3. Littl. § 743.1 If Tenant 40 Where the foundation faileth, all goeth to the ground, Debile fundamentum fallit opus, & contrà.•41 Things incident are adhaerent to their Superiours, or Principals.Deeds, &c. in whoſe cuſtody to r42 Quod tacitè intelligitur, deeſſe non videtur. V. 64. 11.•opiholds.1 When cuſtome hath once create43 Things by reaſon of another are in the ſame plight.Poſſeſſio fratris.1 Albeit the Maxime in Law b44 Perſonal things cannot be done by another.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 66. b. 3.1 A ſingle Corporation conſi45 They cannot be granted or transferred over, as matters of pleaſure, eaſe, truſt, and authority.To46 They being once ſuſpended, or diſcharged for a time, are for ever after extinct.Pl. Co. 36. a. 3.47 They dye with the perſon.•ſte.1 If the Tenant doth Waſte, and he in the reverſion dieth,Co. Inſt.48 Things do enure diverſly according to the diverſity of the time.Purchaſe by Inhabitants.1 The Par49 Quod prius eſt tempore, potius eſt jure. Vide Max. 62. Pl. 10. 19.•emitter.1 One of the reaſons o50 According to the diverſity of the ſame perſon.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 8. a. 1. in Calvins caſe. Co. ib.51 According to the diverſity of ſeverall perſons. Vide infrà, 86.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 46. a. 3.1 If Te52 Relation is of great force in Law.•nceſtor and •eir; and the •eſtator, and •xecutor Cor••laiiva.153 Verba poſteriora propter certitu•inem addita, ad priora, quae certitudine indigent, ſunt referend54 No man can do an act to himſelf.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 38. b. 4. & 39 a. 4.1 A Feme Guardian in Soccag55 The Law favoureth privity. Vide Max. 47. 16.Co. Inſt. pars 1 28. a. 2.1 Tenant in tail after poſſ56 Equal things cannot drown one another, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1 273. b. 3.1 If a man make a leaſ57 Things are to be conſtrued, Secundum aequalitatem rationis.Finch 20. Bract. l. 1. c. 3.1 This Rul58. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, eſt puniendus.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 233. b. 2.1 If a Keeper of59 Omne majus continet in ſe minus.Co. Inſt. pars 1 44 b. 1.1 Albeit by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 160 Additio probat minoritatem.•e is Fee-••mple.1 When you finde it ſaid in any Book,Co. Inſt. pars 161 A matter of higher nature determineth a matter of lower nature, & contrà.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 83. a.62 The more worthy thing draweth unto it things of leſſe worthineſſe.Finch, 23.1 The body of a man i63 Acceſſarium Sequitur Principale.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 49. a. 3.1 If an houſe or land belong to an Off64 Things acceſſary are of the nature of the Principal.40 Aſſ. Pl. 25.1 A ſervant procureth another 65 A mans own words are void, when the Law ſpeaketh as much, or otherwiſe. Vide M. 41. 6, 7, 9.New i66 Expreſsio eorum, quae tacitè inſunt nihil operatur.•pon the Qu. •ant of the •verſion, de•and muſt67 Parte quacunque integrante ſublata, tollitur totum.Co. l. 3. 41. a. 3. in Ratcliffs caſe.1 Lands 68 Ex tota materia emergat Reſolutio.Co. l. 3. 59. b. 1. in Lincoln Colledg caſe.1 It is the office 69 Partes ſimul ſumptae componunt totum: & Totum comprehendit ſuas partes.••int grants •aſſe all.1 W70 Intire things cannot be ſevered.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. a. 1. and 164. b. 3.1 Of Inheritances that 71 Argumentum à Diviſione eſt fortiſsimum in Lege.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 213. b. 3.1 An example or two of t72 The Generals muſt go before, and the Specials muſt follow after.•enerals be•e Specials.1 In a wri73 The more worthy ſhall be ſet before the leſſer worthy.•grees of •hineſs of •d, &c.1 An intire thi74 Sicut natura non facit ſaltum, Ita nec Lex.•der in writs1 In writs of Entry ſur diſſeiſin, if the75 A digniori fieri debet Denominatio & Reſolutio.Quod ei de•rceat for te•ant in Dow•r and by the •o76 The Law requireth decencie and order.The Homager muſt ſeek his Lord.1 The tenant ought to ſéek th77 Negatio Concluſionis eſt error in Lege.Co. l. 10. a. 4. in Priddle and Nappers Caſe.1 In Attachme78 The Law reſpecteth the Bonds of Nature.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 78. a. 2.1 If before the Statutes of 32 & 79 Nemo praeſumitur alienam poſteritatem ſuae praetuliſſe.Collaterall Warrantie.1 If the Tenant in t80 The Law eſteemeth and judgeth of all things according to their nature and quality.Co. Inſt. p. 1.81 In perſons, the Law looketh at the excellency of ſome, and giveth them ſingular Priviledges, and 82 Likewiſe the Law giveth greater priviledges to men, then to Women.Wardſhip, •ody, Father, •ot Mot83 The Law tendreth the weakneſſe and debility of other perſons, as thoſe out of the Realme, in Priſ84 The Law (in ſome Caſes) tendreth the ignorance of men un-lettered.7 E. 3. 9. Co. Inſt. P. 1. 301.85 The Law favoureth Strangers, that are neither parties nor privies.•ord. Tenant. •eofment •pon Con86 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, ſed quando que prodeſſe poteſt. Vide ſupra, Max. 5187 Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 145. b. 3.1 In a Replevin,Replevin. the Defendant88 The Law favoureth things done in anothers Right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 52. a. 2.1 Few or no perſons are 89 The Law diſ-favoureth other perſons, as Villeins, Bond-men, Out-lawes, Ex-leges, men in Exile, Al
    _ 90 As concerning the ages of Infants, the Law ordereth them in this manner;
Seven, for the Lord to have aid for the marriage of his eldeſt daughter of that age.Nine,Litt. §. 36. for a woman to deſerve her Dower.Twelve for a man to take the Oath of Allegiance in a Turn or Leet; and alſo to binde a woman in matter of Marriage.Fourteen, the age of diſcretion; and therefore that a competent age to binde the man in matter of Marriage, for a Ward in Soccage to chuſe his Guardian, and for a woman to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.Fifteen, for the Lord to have Aid to make his eldeſt Son (of that a•e) a Knight.Seventeen, for an Infant Executor to be out of the tuition of Adminiſtrators.Eighteen, for an Infant to have power to make a Will.One and twenty, their full age to make good any Act they do, and for a man to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight-ſervice.
91 In things, the Law reſpecteth every thing, according to Worthineſſe.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 2. If a92 The Law reſpecteth life and liberty moſt, and the Perſon above his poſſeſſions.•e Lords 〈◊〉 ſtati93 Things in the Realty more then thoſe in the Perſonalty.In waſte, the place waſted • more reſpect 94 Freehold and Inheritance more then it doth Chattels.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 3. a. 2.1 The Pariſhioners or95 Matter of Record more then other tranſactions.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 161. a. 3.1 There is a diverſity be96 Conveyances by Livery, or which paſſe Eſtates of the Land, more then thoſe that paſſe by Grant, o97 A matter in the right, more then a matter in poſſeſſion.Fore-judger •f Meſne.1 If the tenant be d98 Yet it favoureth Poſſeſſion, where the right is equal.Happe the •ardſhip.1 If a man purchaſeth at99 The Law reſpecteth matters of profit, and Intereſt, largely; Of pleaſure, skill, eaſe, truſt auth100 And therefore theſe may be countermanded, ſo cannot thoſe.An office without profit diſcharged, w101 Matter of ſubſtance more then matter of circumſtance.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 114. b. 2.1 In a writ of Me102 Yet for memory and ſolemnity ſubſtances are to be-expreſt under Ceremonies.〈◊〉 actions de•ce muſ103 Things executed and done more, then executorie, and to do. Vide 40. 51.•ery in 〈◊〉 without •y vo104 Poſſibility of things.•ſibility if ••riage.1 If Lands be given to a man and a woman un-married,C105 And therefore nothing to be void, which by poſſibility may be good.1 Vide ſupra R. 104. e. 1.Co.106 Id certum eſt, quod certum reddi poteſt.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 96. a. 2.1 If a man hold of his Lord by 107 Res non per ſe invicem, ſed per pecuniam eſtimantur, & non pecunia per Res.Diverſity of a Condit108 It favoureth mutual Recompence.Fee-ſimple without the •ord Heires.1 Vpon partition betwéen Copar109 De minimis non curat Lex.Co. l. 5. 56. b. 3. Knights Caſe.1 In Office by commiſſion under the Ex110 In Actions the Law yeeldeth favour, when for the doing of them there is, 1 Neceſsity.Co. Inſt. p111. 2 Conveniencie.Co. l. 9. 49. a. b. The Earl of Shrewsburies Caſe. Vide Max. 184 cap. 5.1 If a P112. 3 Conformity.••dowment •••ium.1 In ancient time when a man did endow his Wife ad oſtium Eccleſi113. 4 Colour.•o diſcent to 〈◊〉 away en•y.1 If a man ſeiſed of Land hath iſſue two Sonnes, and die ſ114 It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law more then thoſe, that are done by the party.Co. Inſt. 115 Utique fortior, eſt diſpoſitio Legis, quam hominis.Co. Inſt. p. 1 310. a. 1. & •87 b. 2.1 If a r116. It reputeth that a man will deal for their own beſt advantage.•••neſſe.1 Vpon this ground it is117 And therefore the Law believeth againſt the party whatſoever is to his prejudice.Co. Inſt. p: 1.118 When ſeveral remedies are given, the party, to whom the Law giveth them, hath thereby alſo elect119 Cujus eſt diviſio, alterius eſt Electio.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 166. b. 2. & Litt. §. 245.1 Vpon partiti120 Nemo prohibetur pluribus deſenſionibus uti.•ral Pleas 〈◊〉.1 Where the Tenant or Demandant may pl121 Conſenſus tollit Errorem.When by conſent no challenge.1 When in a writ of right the Iury, that a122 Volenti non fit injuria.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 368. a. 2. Litt. §. 701. Pl. Com. 91. the Parſon of Hony123 Quilibet poteſt renunciare juri per ſe introducto.••main.1 Land may be amortified by Licences gr124 Omnis Ratihabitio retró-trahitur, & mandato ſeu licentiae aequiparatur.••gageor & •rtgagee.1 If 125 Nemo tenetur accuſare ſeipſum.Co. Inſt. p. 1 158. b. 1.1 In trial of Challenges,Challenge of a J126 Nec ſe infortuniis & periculis exponere.1 In making continual claime, if the adverſe party lie iFor the time of doing things it countenanceth more. 127 Things done in time of Peace, than in time o128 Things done in the day more then thoſe done in the night.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 135. a. 4. Mirr. l. 5. When things are fit to be ſtraightned to a certaine time, it eſteemeth, according to the nature of t130 Sometimes a whole yeare.•• protection ••re a yeare.1 No protection either profecturae or moratur131 Sometimes the laſt part of the laſt day.Co Inſt. p. 1. 202. a. 2. Co l. 5. 114 b. 2 in Wades caſ132 When no time is limited, the Law appointeth the moſt convenient, and in ſome Caſes, the immediat133 The third offence is eſteemed moſt heynous.2 E. 4. 1.1 The third writ not returned by the Sherif134 The place alſo ought to be convenient.Litt. §. 180. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 120. a. 1.1 If a Villain pur 135 The Law favoureth Charity.••nder by any 〈◊〉 an Ideot.1 Vpon a Mortgage, if the Mortgageor die,C136 De mortuis nil niſi bonum.Littl. §. 399. Co. Inſt. p. 1. 244. a 3. Co. l. 8. 101: a. 3. in Sir R137 And therefore, it hateth malice and oppreſſion.••rious ap••l.1 The Common Law abhorre malice in 138 It favoureth Vertue.139 Hateth Vice.•••ition ••nful void.1 A Remainder may enure upon Condition 140 Intereſt Reipublicae, ne maleficia remaneant impunita.••feit in•• no good 〈◊〉.1 Where an Indictm141 It favoureth Juſtice and right.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 33. a. 1.1 In a writ of Dower brought againſt the142 That, which is not tortious in it ſelfe, cannot be tortious to any.Co. lib. 11. 98. b. 1. in Edw143. Interest Reipublicae, ne Curia Domini Regis deficeret in Juſticia exhibenda.A Letter of Attorne144. It favoureth Common Right.…ment of ••wer.1. Dower being a thing due of Common right,Co. Inſt. p145. And therefore it ſuffereth things againſt principles of Law, rather then the party ſhould be wi146. It hateth Wrong.Diſparagement of the heir puniſhed.1.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 80. b. 2. The Law doth h147. So as none ſhall take benefit or advantage of their own wrong.Litt. S. 19. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 23148. And therefore the Law of it ſelf prejudiceth none.Diſtreſſe.1. Any goods may be diſtrained for 149.Vide M. 150. Ex. 9. Eſpecially for things that cannot be imputed to their own folly, or neglect.150. Nemo debet rem ſuam ſine facto vel def•ctu ſuo amittere.Litt. S. 442. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 262. b.151. It driveth not a man to ſhew, take notice of, or do that which by intendment he knoweth not, or152. Nor to do that, which were in vain for him to do.Litt. S. 103. Co. Inſt pars 1. 79. a. 2.1. If 153. Non licet, quod diſpendio licet.Surrenders.1. M. Leaſes for twenty one years to S. and is bound154. It favoreth Truth, Faith, and Certainty. Vide Max. 41. •9.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. a. 3.1. Regula255. It Disfavoureth Impoſſibilities.Co. Inſt. pars, 1. 25. b. 4.1. If Lands be given to a man and t156. Non cogit ad Impoſſibilia, & Impotentia excuſat Legem.Shewing a Deed.1. If a Deed remaine in on157. It disfavoureth Falſhood, Fraud, and Covin, Vide Dyer 294. 8.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 17. b. 3.1. A man 158. Jus & Fraus numquam Cohabitant.Co. l. 10. 45. a. 4. in Jennings his caſe.1. The Statute of 14 E159. Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur & per obliquum.Litt. S. 361. Co. Inſt. p160. Rectum est index ſui & Obliqui.Co. l. 10. 24. b. 2.1. In the Caſe of Suttons Hoſpitall Sir Edwa161. It disfavoureth Improbabilities.Co. Inſt. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l. 10. 50. b. 1. in Lampets caſe.162. Uncertainties, by which the truth may be inveigled.Villain.1. If a man do enfranchiſe a Villain163. Imperſonalitas non concludit nec ligat.Co. Inſt. 1. 352. b. 1. Pl. Co. 398. a. 1.1. An Eſtoppel164. Generale nihil certi implicat.Generall words.1.Co. Inſt. 1. 33. a. 3. Dodingtons caſe. If the K165. Doloſus verſatur in generalibus.Co. l. 3. 80. b. 4. Twines caſe.1. P. being indebted to T. in f166. Variance.Co. Inſt. 1. 131. a. 4.1. A materiall Variance between a Protection,Protection. and thVide 40. 53.167. Contrariety and Repugnancy. And therefore,Libera Eleemoſina.Co. Inſt. 1. 97. a.1. I168. It will not drive a man to juſtifie or ſhew that, which he goeth about to defeate, or which mak169. Non poteſt adduci exceptio ejuſdem rei, cujus petitur diſſolutio.Taile diſcontinued.1. If Tenan170. None ſhall take exception to an Error or Act, which operateth to his own advantage.Co. l. 3. 69171 Nemo tenetur armare adverſarium ſuum contraſe.Challenge.1 He that challengeth a Iuror for the hu172 It favoureth Diligence; And therefore hateth Folly and Negligence.Waſte,1 Waſte may be done in h173 Negligentia ſemper habet infortunium Comitem.Laches.1. Regularly,Co. Inſt. pars 1. 246. b. 2. no174 Vigilantibus non Dormientibus Leges ſubveniunt.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 139. b. 1.1 At the Common Law u175 It favoureth ſpeeding of mens Cauſes; And thereforeProtections,1 In antient time,Co. Inſt. pars 176 Hateth Delayes.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 32. b. 41 Some ſay, that the demandant in a writ of Dower,Dower177 Unneceſſary Circumſtances; And therefore, Fruſtrafit per plura, quod fieri poteſt per Pauciora.T178 Expedit Reipublicae, ut ſit finis Litium.1 Regularly, an Abbot, Prior, Biſhop,Abbot. Annuity. or179 Circuit of Action.Co. Inſt. part 1. 265. a. 3.1 Littleton ſaith, §. 446. If the father be diſſei180 Matter of Vexation; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 127. a. 1.1 If the demandant or plaintif be n181 Pendente Lite nihil innovetur.Quar• Imped•t.1 At the Common Law,Co. Inſt. part 1. 344. b. 3. if 182 Infiniteneſs and multiplicity of ſutes.Co. Inſt. part 1. 56. a. 2. Co. l. 5. 73. a. 3. in Willia183 The Law conſtrueth things with Equity and Moderation.Convenient time.1 In 18 E. 4. 22.Co. l. 3. 184 Reſtraineth a general Act or Rule, and (ſometimes alſo) a Particular contract, if there be found185 Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.App•al. Indictment.1 Wetherol brings an appeal of murder agai186 It flyeth and preventeth all occaſions of Evill.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 88. b. 1. Littl. §. 123.1 The 187 It moderateth the ſtrictneſs of the Law it ſelf.Co. I ſt. part 1 13. •. 1.1 A Protection Moratur188 Verba ſemper accipienda ſunt in mitiori ſenſu.Slander.1 If one ſay to another, that he is perjur189. Conſtrueth things according to Common poſſibility or intendment; And thereforeJudges.1 Regularl190 Stabit praeſumptio donec probetur in Contrarium.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 222. b. 3. 34 Aſſ. pl. 1.1 If 191 Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Jura adaptantur.Co. Inſt. part l. 238. a. 2.1 It is ſaid,Deſcen192 Frequentia Actus multum operatur.Fine. Non-claim.1 A. poſſeſſed of divers lands in D. for years,193 It alwayes conſtrueth things to the Beſt; And thereforeCo. Inſt. part 1. 87. b. 3.1 If a man be 194 Every Act to be lawfull, when it ſtandeth indifferent, whether it ſhould be lawfull, or not.Co. 195 Non praeſtat impedimentum, quod de Jure non ſortitur effectum. Vide 195, 13.Baſtard eigne & Muli196 Praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.Co. l. 11 88. b. 1 in the caſe of Monopolies.1 The 197 The Law favoureth things for the Common-wealth.Incapable Officers.1 If an Office either of the g198 Publique Commerce. Vide ſupra 198, 31.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 2. b. 2.1 If an Alien take a leaſe for y199 Honor and Order.Tenant by Curteſie.1 A man ſhall be tenant by the Curteſie of an houſe,Co. Inſt.200 Publique quiet.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 5. a. 3.1 No Subject can build a Caſtle or houſe of ſtrength im201 Conventio ſeu beneficium privatorum non poteſt publico juri derogare. Vide ſupra 198, 29.Co. Inſ202 Minime mutanda ſunt, quae certam habuerunt interpretationem. Vide Max. 201. per tout.Co. Inſt. p203 A Communi Obſervantia non eſt recedendum.Littl §. 371. Co. Inſt. pars 1. 229 b 4. Vide Max. 203.204 Eventus varios Res nova ſemper habet; And therefore it hateth new Inventions, and Innovations.Co205 Communis Error facit Jus.Co. Inſt. 1. 52. b. 2.1 In a deed of feoffment beginning with Omnibus C206 So doth a Cuſtom, which is reaſonable: unreaſonable, contra.Co. Inſt. •pars 1. 59 b. 41 Of fines207 Licet Conſuetudo ſit magnae Authoritatis, Nunquam tamen Praejudicat manifeſtae veritati.Co. l. 4208 Husband and wife are one Perſon, And thereforeRebutter.1 If a feme heir of a diſſeiſor enfeoff m209 The Wife is of the ſame Condition with her Husband.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 16. b. 3. & Co. l. 4 118 b.210 They cannot ſue one another, nor make any grant one to the other, or the like.Baron cannot g•a• 211 Upon a joynt Purchaſe during the Coverture, either of them taketh the whole.Co. Inſt. p•rs 1. 55212 The Husband is the Womans head; And thereforeHomage by Baron and feme.1 The husband and wife doi213 All that ſhe hath is her Husbands. Vide Ho. 216.Co. Inſt. pars 1. 112. a. 4.1 Omnia, quae ſunt u214. Her will ought to become his will, and to be ſubject unto it.Co. Inſt pars 1. 112. b. 1.1. The 
#####Back#####

1. THE TABLE.

**Types of content**

  * There are 30 **verse** lines!
  * Oh, Mr. Jourdain, there is **prose** in there!

There are 3529 **omitted** fragments! 
 @__reason__ (3529) : illegible (3529)  •  @__resp__ (3421) : #PDCC (3421)  •  @__extent__ (3529) : 1 letter (2189), 2 letters (702), 1 word (430), 3 letters (175), 4 letters (15), 1 paragraph (5), 1 chunk (7), 1 span (4), 5 letters (1), 2+ letters (1)

**Character listing**


|Text|string(s)|codepoint(s)|
|---|---|---|
|Latin-1 Supplement|é§èòàùáüâìó|233 167 232 242 224 249 225 252 226 236 243|
|Latin Extended-A|ſ|383|
|Latin Extended-B|Ʋ|434|
|Combining             Diacritical Marks|̄|772|
|Greek|μόνοϲπωλεαί|956 972 957 959 1010 960 969 955 949 945 943|
|GreekandCoptic|μόνοϲπωλεαί|956 972 957 959 1010 960 969 955 949 945 943|
|General Punctuation|•…—|8226 8230 8212|
|Geometric Shapes|◊▪|9674 9642|
|CJKSymbolsandPunctuation|〈〉|12296 12297|

##Tag Usage Summary##

###Header Tag Usage###

|No|element name|occ|attributes|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|__author__|2||
|2.|__availability__|1||
|3.|__biblFull__|1||
|4.|__change__|5||
|5.|__date__|8| @__when__ (1) : 2013-12 (1)|
|6.|__edition__|1||
|7.|__editionStmt__|1||
|8.|__editorialDecl__|1||
|9.|__encodingDesc__|1||
|10.|__extent__|2||
|11.|__fileDesc__|1||
|12.|__idno__|6| @__type__ (6) : DLPS (1), STC (2), EEBO-CITATION (1), OCLC (1), VID (1)|
|13.|__keywords__|1| @__scheme__ (1) : http://authorities.loc.gov/ (1)|
|14.|__label__|5||
|15.|__langUsage__|1||
|16.|__language__|1| @__ident__ (1) : eng (1)|
|17.|__listPrefixDef__|1||
|18.|__note__|5||
|19.|__notesStmt__|2||
|20.|__p__|11||
|21.|__prefixDef__|2| @__ident__ (2) : tcp (1), char (1)  •  @__matchPattern__ (2) : ([0-9\-]+):([0-9IVX]+) (1), (.+) (1)  •  @__replacementPattern__ (2) : http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=$1&page=$2 (1), https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/Texts/master/tcpchars.xml#$1 (1)|
|22.|__profileDesc__|1||
|23.|__projectDesc__|1||
|24.|__pubPlace__|2||
|25.|__publicationStmt__|2||
|26.|__publisher__|2||
|27.|__ref__|1| @__target__ (1) : http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/. (1)|
|28.|__revisionDesc__|1||
|29.|__seriesStmt__|1||
|30.|__sourceDesc__|1||
|31.|__term__|3||
|32.|__textClass__|1||
|33.|__title__|3||
|34.|__titleStmt__|2||


###Text Tag Usage###

|No|element name|occ|attributes|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|__am__|4||
|2.|__back__|1||
|3.|__bibl__|1||
|4.|__body__|1||
|5.|__closer__|1||
|6.|__desc__|3529||
|7.|__div__|223| @__type__ (223) : title_page (1), to_the_reader (1), notice (1), table_of_contents (1), introduction (1), part (4), maxim (212), maxims (1), index (1)  •  @__n__ (217) : 1 (2), 2 (2), 3 (2), 4 (2), 5 (1), 6 (1), 7 (1), 8 (1), 9 (1), 10 (1), 11 (1), 12 (1), 13 (1), 14 (1), 15 (1), 16 (1), 17 (1), 18 (1), 19 (1), 20 (1), 21 (1), 22 (1), 23 (1), 24 (1), 25 (1), 26 (1), 27 (1), 28 (1), 29 (1), 30 (1), 31 (1), 32 (1), 33 (1), 34 (1), 35 (1), 36 (1), 37 (1), 38 (1), 39 (1), 40 (1), 41 (1), 42 (1), 43 (1), 44 (1), 45 (1), 46 (1), 47 (1), 48 (1), 49 (1), 50 (1), 51 (1), 52 (1), 53 (1), 54 (1), 55 (1), 56 (1), 57 (1), 58 (1), 59 (1), 60 (1), 61 (1), 62 (1), 63 (1), 64 (1), 65 (1), 66 (1), 67 (1), 68 (1), 69 (1), 70 (1), 71 (1), 72 (1), 73 (1), 74 (1), 75 (1), 76 (1), 77 (1), 78 (1), 79 (1), 80 (1), 81 (1), 82 (1), 83 (1), 84 (1), 85 (1), 86 (1), 87 (1), 88 (1), 89 (1), 90 (1), 91 (1), 92 (1), 93 (1), 94 (1), 95 (1), 96 (1), 97 (1), 98 (1), 99 (1), 100 (1), 101 (1), 102 (1), 103 (1), 104 (1), 105 (1), 106 (1), 107 (1), 108 (1), 109 (1), 110 (1), 111 (1), 112 (1), 113 (1), 114 (1), 115 (1), 116 (1), 117 (1), 118 (1), 119 (1), 120 (1), 121 (1), 122 (1), 123 (1), 124 (1), 125 (1), 126 (1), 127 (1), 128 (1), 129 (1), 130 (1), 131 (1), 132 (1), 133 (1), 134 (1), 135 (1), 136 (1), 137 (1), 138-139 (1), 140 (1), 141 (1), 142 (1), 143 (1), 144 (1), 145 (1), 146 (1), 147 (1), 148 (1), 149 (1), 150 (1), 151 (1), 152 (1), 153 (1), 154 (1), 155 (1), 156 (1), 157 (1), 158 (1), 159 (1), 160 (1), 161 (1), 162 (1), 163 (1), 164 (1), 165 (1), 166 (1), 167 (1), 168 (1), 169 (1), 170 (1), 171 (1), 172 (1), 173 (1), 174 (1), 175 (1), 176 (1), 177 (1), 178 (1), 179 (1), 180 (1), 181 (1), 182 (1), 183 (1), 184 (1), 185 (1), 186 (1), 187 (1), 188 (1), 189 (1), 190 (1), 191 (1), 192 (1), 193 (1), 194 (1), 195 (1), 196 (1), 197 (1), 198 (1), 199 (1), 200 (1), 201 (1), 202 (1), 203 (1), 204 (1), 205 (1), 206 (1), 207 (1), 208 (1), 209 (1), 210 (1), 211 (1), 212 (1), 213 (1), 214 (1)|
|8.|__epigraph__|213||
|9.|__ex__|4||
|10.|__expan__|4||
|11.|__front__|1||
|12.|__g__|9599| @__ref__ (9599) : char:EOLhyphen (9353), char:V (12), char:abque (4), char:cmbAbbrStroke (15), char:EOLunhyphen (178), char:punc (37)|
|13.|__gap__|3529| @__reason__ (3529) : illegible (3529)  •  @__resp__ (3421) : #PDCC (3421)  •  @__extent__ (3529) : 1 letter (2189), 2 letters (702), 1 word (430), 3 letters (175), 4 letters (15), 1 paragraph (5), 1 chunk (7), 1 span (4), 5 letters (1), 2+ letters (1)|
|14.|__head__|31||
|15.|__hi__|19785| @__rend__ (71) : sup (71)|
|16.|__item__|677||
|17.|__l__|30||
|18.|__list__|23||
|19.|__milestone__|37| @__type__ (37) : tcpmilestone (37)  •  @__unit__ (37) : unspecified (37)  •  @__n__ (37) : I (25), N (2), P (1), R (1), F (8)|
|20.|__note__|8462| @__place__ (8462) : margin (8462)  •  @__n__ (10) : a (5), c (4), e (1)|
|21.|__opener__|2||
|22.|__p__|4094| @__n__ (4061) : 1 (212), 2 (206), 3 (195), 4 (185), 5 (175), 6 (163), 7 (152), 8 (142), 9 (130), 10 (122), 11 (113), 12 (103), 13 (96), 14 (89), 15 (86), 16 (83), 17 (79), 18 (75), 19 (72), 20 (68), 21 (68), 22 (64), 23 (59), 24 (56), 25 (56), 26 (54), 27 (52), 28 (49), 29 (46), 30 (45), 31 (44), 32 (42), 33 (41), 34 (40), 35 (39), 36 (36), 37 (35), 38 (29), 39 (28), 40 (26), 41 (25), 42 (24), 43 (24), 44 (24), 45 (24), 46 (20), 47 (20), 48 (19), 49 (17), 50 (15), 51 (15), 52 (15), 53 (14), 54 (14), 55 (14), 56 (14), 57 (14), 58 (14), 59 (13), 60 (13), 61 (12), 62 (12), 63 (10), 64 (10), 65 (10), 66 (10), 67 (9), 68 (9), 69 (8), 70 (7), 71 (6), 72 (6), 73 (6), 74 (6), 75 (6), 76 (6), 77 (6), 78 (6), 79 (6), 80 (6), 81 (5), 82 (5), 83 (4), 84 (4), 85 (4), 86 (4), 87 (4), 88 (2), 89 (2), 90 (2), 91 (2), 92 (2), 93 (2), 94 (2), 95 (2), 96 (2), 97 (2), 98 (2), 99 (2), 100 (2), 101 (2), 102 (2), 103 (2), 104 (2), 105 (2), 106 (2), 107 (1), 108 (1), 109 (1), 110 (1), 111 (1), 112 (1), 113 (1), 114 (1), 115 (1), 116 (1), 117 (1), 118 (1), 119 (1), 120 (1), 121 (1), 122 (1), 123 (1), 124 (1), 125 (1), 126 (1), 127 (1), 128 (1), 129 (1), 130 (1), 131 (1), 132 (1), 133 (1), 134 (1), 135 (1)|
|23.|__pb__|747| @__facs__ (747) : tcp:95558:1 (2), tcp:95558:2 (2), tcp:95558:3 (2), tcp:95558:4 (2), tcp:95558:5 (2), tcp:95558:6 (2), tcp:95558:7 (2), tcp:95558:8 (2), tcp:95558:9 (2), tcp:95558:10 (2), tcp:95558:11 (2), tcp:95558:12 (2), tcp:95558:13 (2), tcp:95558:14 (2), tcp:95558:15 (2), tcp:95558:16 (2), tcp:95558:17 (2), tcp:95558:18 (2), tcp:95558:19 (2), tcp:95558:20 (2), tcp:95558:21 (2), tcp:95558:22 (2), tcp:95558:23 (2), tcp:95558:24 (2), tcp:95558:25 (2), tcp:95558:26 (2), tcp:95558:27 (2), tcp:95558:28 (2), tcp:95558:29 (2), tcp:95558:30 (2), tcp:95558:31 (2), tcp:95558:32 (2), tcp:95558:33 (2), tcp:95558:34 (2), tcp:95558:35 (2), tcp:95558:36 (2), tcp:95558:37 (2), tcp:95558:38 (2), tcp:95558:39 (2), tcp:95558:40 (2), tcp:95558:41 (2), tcp:95558:42 (2), tcp:95558:43 (2), tcp:95558:44 (2), tcp:95558:45 (2), tcp:95558:46 (2), tcp:95558:47 (2), tcp:95558:48 (2), tcp:95558:49 (2), tcp:95558:50 (2), tcp:95558:51 (2), tcp:95558:52 (2), tcp:95558:53 (2), tcp:95558:54 (2), tcp:95558:55 (2), tcp:95558:56 (2), tcp:95558:57 (2), tcp:95558:58 (2), tcp:95558:59 (2), tcp:95558:60 (2), tcp:95558:61 (2), tcp:95558:62 (2), tcp:95558:63 (2), tcp:95558:64 (2), tcp:95558:65 (2), tcp:95558:66 (2), tcp:95558:67 (2), tcp:95558:68 (2), tcp:95558:69 (2), tcp:95558:70 (2), tcp:95558:71 (2), tcp:95558:72 (2), tcp:95558:73 (2), tcp:95558:74 (2), tcp:95558:75 (2), tcp:95558:76 (2), tcp:95558:77 (2), tcp:95558:78 (2), tcp:95558:79 (2), tcp:95558:80 (2), tcp:95558:81 (2), tcp:95558:82 (2), tcp:95558:83 (2), tcp:95558:84 (2), tcp:95558:85 (2), tcp:95558:86 (2), tcp:95558:87 (2), tcp:95558:88 (2), tcp:95558:89 (2), tcp:95558:90 (2), tcp:95558:91 (2), tcp:95558:92 (2), tcp:95558:93 (2), tcp:95558:94 (2), tcp:95558:95 (2), tcp:95558:96 (2), tcp:95558:97 (2), tcp:95558:98 (2), tcp:95558:99 (2), tcp:95558:100 (2), tcp:95558:101 (2), tcp:95558:102 (2), tcp:95558:103 (2), tcp:95558:104 (2), tcp:95558:105 (2), tcp:95558:106 (2), tcp:95558:107 (2), tcp:95558:108 (2), tcp:95558:109 (2), tcp:95558:110 (2), tcp:95558:111 (2), tcp:95558:112 (2), tcp:95558:113 (2), tcp:95558:114 (2), tcp:95558:115 (2), tcp:95558:116 (2), tcp:95558:117 (2), tcp:95558:118 (2), tcp:95558:119 (2), tcp:95558:120 (2), tcp:95558:121 (2), tcp:95558:122 (2), tcp:95558:123 (2), tcp:95558:124 (2), tcp:95558:125 (2), tcp:95558:126 (2), tcp:95558:127 (2), tcp:95558:128 (2), tcp:95558:129 (2), tcp:95558:130 (2), tcp:95558:131 (2), tcp:95558:132 (2), tcp:95558:133 (2), tcp:95558:134 (2), tcp:95558:135 (2), tcp:95558:136 (2), tcp:95558:137 (2), tcp:95558:138 (2), tcp:95558:139 (2), tcp:95558:140 (2), tcp:95558:141 (2), tcp:95558:142 (2), tcp:95558:143 (2), tcp:95558:144 (2), tcp:95558:145 (2), tcp:95558:146 (2), tcp:95558:147 (2), tcp:95558:148 (2), tcp:95558:149 (2), tcp:95558:150 (2), tcp:95558:151 (2), tcp:95558:152 (2), tcp:95558:153 (2), tcp:95558:154 (2), tcp:95558:155 (2), tcp:95558:156 (2), tcp:95558:157 (2), tcp:95558:158 (2), tcp:95558:159 (2), tcp:95558:160 (2), tcp:95558:161 (2), tcp:95558:162 (2), tcp:95558:163 (2), tcp:95558:164 (2), tcp:95558:165 (2), tcp:95558:166 (2), tcp:95558:167 (2), tcp:95558:168 (2), tcp:95558:169 (2), tcp:95558:170 (2), tcp:95558:171 (2), tcp:95558:172 (2), tcp:95558:173 (2), tcp:95558:174 (2), tcp:95558:175 (2), tcp:95558:176 (2), tcp:95558:177 (2), tcp:95558:178 (2), tcp:95558:179 (2), tcp:95558:180 (2), tcp:95558:181 (2), tcp:95558:182 (2), tcp:95558:183 (2), tcp:95558:184 (2), tcp:95558:185 (2), tcp:95558:186 (2), tcp:95558:187 (2), tcp:95558:188 (2), tcp:95558:189 (2), tcp:95558:190 (2), tcp:95558:191 (2), tcp:95558:192 (2), tcp:95558:193 (2), tcp:95558:194 (2), tcp:95558:195 (2), tcp:95558:196 (2), tcp:95558:197 (2), tcp:95558:198 (2), tcp:95558:199 (2), tcp:95558:200 (2), tcp:95558:201 (2), tcp:95558:202 (2), tcp:95558:203 (2), tcp:95558:204 (2), tcp:95558:205 (2), tcp:95558:206 (2), tcp:95558:207 (2), tcp:95558:208 (2), tcp:95558:209 (2), tcp:95558:210 (2), tcp:95558:211 (2), tcp:95558:212 (2), tcp:95558:213 (2), tcp:95558:214 (2), tcp:95558:215 (2), tcp:95558:216 (2), tcp:95558:217 (2), tcp:95558:218 (2), tcp:95558:219 (2), tcp:95558:220 (2), tcp:95558:221 (2), tcp:95558:222 (2), tcp:95558:223 (2), tcp:95558:224 (2), tcp:95558:225 (2), tcp:95558:226 (2), tcp:95558:227 (2), tcp:95558:228 (2), tcp:95558:229 (2), tcp:95558:230 (2), tcp:95558:231 (2), tcp:95558:232 (2), tcp:95558:233 (2), tcp:95558:234 (2), tcp:95558:235 (2), tcp:95558:236 (2), tcp:95558:237 (2), tcp:95558:238 (2), tcp:95558:239 (2), tcp:95558:240 (2), tcp:95558:241 (2), tcp:95558:242 (2), tcp:95558:243 (2), tcp:95558:244 (2), tcp:95558:245 (2), tcp:95558:246 (2), tcp:95558:247 (2), tcp:95558:248 (2), tcp:95558:249 (2), tcp:95558:250 (2), tcp:95558:251 (2), tcp:95558:252 (2), tcp:95558:253 (2), tcp:95558:254 (2), tcp:95558:255 (2), tcp:95558:256 (2), tcp:95558:257 (2), tcp:95558:258 (2), tcp:95558:259 (2), tcp:95558:260 (2), tcp:95558:261 (2), tcp:95558:262 (2), tcp:95558:263 (2), tcp:95558:264 (2), tcp:95558:265 (2), tcp:95558:266 (2), tcp:95558:267 (2), tcp:95558:268 (2), tcp:95558:269 (2), tcp:95558:270 (2), tcp:95558:271 (2), tcp:95558:272 (2), tcp:95558:273 (2), tcp:95558:274 (2), tcp:95558:275 (2), tcp:95558:276 (2), tcp:95558:277 (2), tcp:95558:278 (2), tcp:95558:279 (2), tcp:95558:280 (2), tcp:95558:281 (2), tcp:95558:282 (2), tcp:95558:283 (2), tcp:95558:284 (2), tcp:95558:285 (2), tcp:95558:286 (2), tcp:95558:287 (2), tcp:95558:288 (2), tcp:95558:289 (2), tcp:95558:290 (2), tcp:95558:291 (2), tcp:95558:292 (2), tcp:95558:293 (2), tcp:95558:294 (2), tcp:95558:295 (2), tcp:95558:296 (2), tcp:95558:297 (2), tcp:95558:298 (2), tcp:95558:299 (2), tcp:95558:300 (2), tcp:95558:301 (2), tcp:95558:302 (2), tcp:95558:303 (2), tcp:95558:304 (2), tcp:95558:305 (2), tcp:95558:306 (2), tcp:95558:307 (2), tcp:95558:308 (2), tcp:95558:309 (2), tcp:95558:310 (2), tcp:95558:311 (2), tcp:95558:312 (2), tcp:95558:313 (2), tcp:95558:314 (2), tcp:95558:315 (2), tcp:95558:316 (2), tcp:95558:317 (2), tcp:95558:318 (2), tcp:95558:319 (2), tcp:95558:320 (2), tcp:95558:321 (2), tcp:95558:322 (2), tcp:95558:323 (2), tcp:95558:324 (2), tcp:95558:325 (2), tcp:95558:326 (2), tcp:95558:327 (2), tcp:95558:328 (2), tcp:95558:329 (2), tcp:95558:330 (2), tcp:95558:331 (2), tcp:95558:332 (2), tcp:95558:333 (2), tcp:95558:334 (2), tcp:95558:335 (2), tcp:95558:336 (2), tcp:95558:337 (2), tcp:95558:338 (2), tcp:95558:339 (2), tcp:95558:340 (2), tcp:95558:341 (2), tcp:95558:342 (2), tcp:95558:343 (2), tcp:95558:344 (2), tcp:95558:345 (2), tcp:95558:346 (2), tcp:95558:347 (2), tcp:95558:348 (2), tcp:95558:349 (2), tcp:95558:350 (2), tcp:95558:351 (2), tcp:95558:352 (2), tcp:95558:353 (2), tcp:95558:354 (2), tcp:95558:355 (2), tcp:95558:356 (2), tcp:95558:357 (2), tcp:95558:358 (2), tcp:95558:359 (2), tcp:95558:360 (2), tcp:95558:361 (2), tcp:95558:362 (2), tcp:95558:363 (2), tcp:95558:364 (2), tcp:95558:365 (2), tcp:95558:366 (2), tcp:95558:367 (2), tcp:95558:368 (2), tcp:95558:369 (2), tcp:95558:370 (2), tcp:95558:371 (2), tcp:95558:372 (2), tcp:95558:373 (2), tcp:95558:374 (1)  •  @__n__ (719) : 1 (1), 2 (1), 3 (1), 4 (1), 5 (1), 6 (1), 7 (1), 8 (1), 9 (1), 10 (1), 11 (1), 12 (1), 13 (1), 14 (1), 15 (1), 16 (1), 17 (1), 18 (1), 19 (1), 20 (1), 21 (1), 22 (1), 23 (1), 24 (1), 25 (1), 26 (1), 27 (1), 29 (1), 30 (1), 31 (1), 32 (1), 33 (1), 34 (1), 35 (1), 36 (1), 37 (1), 38 (1), 39 (1), 40 (1), 41 (1), 42 (1), 43 (1), 44 (1), 45 (1), 46 (1), 47 (1), 48 (1), 49 (1), 50 (1), 51 (1), 52 (1), 53 (1), 54 (1), 55 (1), 56 (1), 57 (1), 58 (1), 59 (1), 60 (1), 61 (1), 62 (1), 63 (1), 64 (1), 65 (1), 66 (1), 67 (1), 68 (1), 69 (1), 70 (1), 71 (1), 72 (1), 73 (1), 74 (1), 75 (1), 76 (1), 77 (1), 78 (1), 79 (1), 80 (1), 81 (1), 82 (1), 83 (1), 84 (1), 85 (1), 86 (1), 87 (1), 88 (1), 89 (1), 90 (1), 91 (1), 92 (1), 93 (1), 94 (1), 95 (1), 96 (1), 97 (1), 98 (1), 99 (1), 100 (1), 101 (1), 102 (1), 103 (1), 104 (1), 105 (1), 106 (1), 107 (1), 108 (1), 109 (1), 110 (1), 111 (1), 112 (1), 113 (1), 114 (1), 115 (1), 116 (1), 117 (1), 118 (1), 119 (1), 120 (1), 121 (1), 122 (1), 123 (1), 124 (1), 125 (1), 126 (1), 127 (1), 128 (1), 129 (1), 130 (1), 131 (1), 132 (1), 133 (1), 134 (1), 135 (1), 136 (1), 137 (1), 138 (1), 139 (1), 140 (1), 141 (1), 142 (1), 143 (1), 144 (1), 145 (1), 147 (2), 148 (2), 149 (1), 150 (1), 151 (1), 152 (1), 153 (1), 154 (1), 155 (1), 156 (1), 157 (1), 158 (1), 159 (1), 160 (1), 161 (1), 162 (1), 163 (1), 164 (1), 165 (1), 166 (1), 167 (1), 168 (1), 169 (1), 170 (1), 171 (1), 172 (1), 173 (1), 174 (1), 175 (1), 176 (1), 177 (1), 178 (1), 179 (1), 180 (1), 181 (1), 182 (1), 183 (2), 184 (2), 185 (2), 186 (2), 187 (2), 188 (2), 189 (2), 190 (2), 191 (2), 192 (2), 193 (1), 194 (1), 195 (1), 196 (1), 197 (1), 198 (1), 199 (1), 200 (1), 201 (1), 202 (1), 203 (1), 204 (1), 205 (1), 206 (1), 207 (1), 208 (1), 209 (1), 210 (1), 211 (1), 212 (1), 213 (1), 214 (1), 215 (1), 216 (1), 217 (1), 218 (1), 219 (1), 220 (1), 221 (1), 222 (1), 223 (1), 224 (1), 225 (1), 226 (1), 227 (1), 228 (1), 229 (1), 230 (1), 231 (1), 232 (1), 233 (1), 234 (1), 235 (1), 236 (1), 237 (1), 238 (1), 239 (1), 240 (1), 241 (1), 242 (1), 243 (1), 244 (2), 245 (1), 247 (1), 248 (1), 249 (1), 250 (1), 251 (1), 252 (1), 253 (1), 254 (1), 255 (1), 256 (1), 257 (1), 258 (1), 259 (1), 260 (1), 261 (1), 262 (1), 263 (1), 264 (1), 265 (1), 266 (1), 267 (1), 268 (1), 269 (1), 270 (1), 281 (1), 282 (1), 283 (1), 284 (1), 285 (1), 286 (1), 287 (1), 288 (1), 289 (1), 290 (1), 291 (1), 292 (1), 293 (1), 294 (1), 295 (1), 296 (1), 297 (1), 298 (1), 299 (1), 300 (1), 301 (1), 302 (1), 303 (1), 304 (1), 305 (1), 306 (1), 307 (1), 308 (1), 309 (1), 310 (1), 311 (1), 312 (1), 313 (1), 314 (1), 315 (1), 316 (1), 317 (1), 318 (1), 319 (1), 320 (1), 321 (1), 322 (1), 323 (2), 324 (1), 325 (1), 326 (1), 327 (1), 328 (1), 329 (1), 330 (1), 331 (1), 333 (1), 334 (1), 335 (1), 336 (1), 337 (1), 338 (1), 339 (1), 340 (1), 341 (1), 342 (1), 343 (1), 344 (1), 345 (1), 346 (1), 347 (1), 348 (1), 349 (1), 350 (1), 351 (1), 352 (1), 353 (1), 354 (1), 355 (1), 356 (1), 357 (1), 358 (1), 359 (1), 360 (1), 361 (1), 362 (1), 363 (1), 364 (1), 365 (1), 366 (1), 367 (1), 368 (1), 369 (1), 370 (1), 371 (1), 372 (1), 373 (1), 374 (1), 375 (1), 376 (1), 377 (1), 378 (1), 379 (1), 380 (1), 381 (1), 382 (1), 383 (1), 384 (1), 385 (1), 386 (1), 387 (1), 388 (1), 389 (1), 390 (1), 391 (1), 392 (1), 393 (1), 394 (1), 395 (1), 396 (1), 397 (1), 398 (1), 399 (1), 400 (1), 401 (1), 402 (1), 403 (1), 404 (1), 405 (1), 406 (1), 407 (1), 408 (1), 409 (1), 410 (1), 411 (1), 412 (1), 413 (1), 414 (1), 415 (1), 416 (1), 417 (1), 418 (1), 419 (1), 420 (1), 421 (1), 422 (1), 423 (1), 424 (1), 425 (1), 426 (1), 427 (1), 428 (1), 429 (1), 430 (1), 431 (1), 432 (1), 433 (1), 434 (1), 453 (2), 436 (1), 437 (1), 438 (1), 439 (1), 440 (1), 441 (1), 442 (1), 443 (1), 444 (1), 445 (1), 446 (1), 447 (1), 448 (1), 449 (1), 450 (1), 451 (1), 452 (1), 454 (1), 455 (1), 456 (1), 457 (1), 459 (2), 460 (1), 461 (1), 462 (1), 463 (1), 464 (1), 465 (1), 466 (1), 467 (1), 468 (1), 469 (1), 470 (1), 471 (1), 472 (1), 473 (1), 474 (1), 475 (1), 476 (1), 477 (1), 478 (1), 479 (1), 480 (1), 481 (1), 482 (1), 483 (1), 484 (1), 485 (1), 486 (1), 487 (1), 488 (1), 489 (1), 490 (1), 491 (1), 492 (1), 493 (1), 494 (1), 495 (1), 496 (1), 497 (1), 498 (1), 499 (1), 500 (1), 501 (1), 502 (1), 503 (1), 504 (1), 505 (1), 506 (1), 507 (1), 508 (1), 545 (1), 546 (1), 547 (1), 549 (1), 550 (1), 551 (1), 552 (1), 553 (1), 554 (1), 555 (1), 556 (1), 557 (1), 558 (1), 559 (1), 560 (1), 561 (1), 562 (1), 563 (1), 564 (1), 565 (1), 566 (1), 567 (1), 568 (1), 569 (1), 570 (1), 571 (1), 572 (1), 573 (1), 574 (1), 575 (1), 576 (1), 577 (1), 578 (1), 579 (1), 580 (1), 581 (1), 582 (1), 583 (1), 584 (1), 585 (1), 586 (1), 587 (1), 588 (1), 589 (1), 590 (1), 591 (1), 592 (1), 593 (1), 594 (1), 595 (1), 596 (1), 597 (1), 598 (1), 599 (1), 600 (1), 601 (1), 602 (1), 603 (1), 604 (1), 605 (1), 606 (1), 607 (1), 608 (1), 609 (1), 610 (1), 611 (1), 612 (1), 613 (1), 614 (1), 615 (1), 616 (1), 617 (1), 618 (1), 619 (1), 620 (1), 621 (1), 622 (1), 623 (1), 624 (1), 625 (1), 626 (1), 627 (1), 628 (1), 629 (1), 630 (1), 631 (1), 632 (1), 633 (1), 634 (1), 635 (1), 636 (1), 637 (1), 638 (1), 639 (1), 640 (1), 641 (1), 642 (1), 643 (1), 644 (1), 645 (1), 646 (1), 647 (1), 648 (1), 665 (1), 666 (1), 667 (1), 668 (1), 669 (1), 670 (1), 671 (1), 672 (1), 673 (1), 674 (1), 675 (1), 676 (1), 677 (1), 678 (1), 679 (1), 680 (1), 681 (1), 682 (1), 683 (1), 684 (1), 685 (1), 686 (1), 687 (1), 688 (1), 689 (1), 690 (1), 691 (1), 692 (1), 693 (1), 694 (1), 695 (1), 696 (2), 697 (1), 698 (1), 700 (1), 701 (1), 702 (1), 703 (1), 704 (1), 705 (1), 706 (1), 707 (1), 708 (1), 709 (1), 710 (1), 711 (1), 712 (1), 713 (1), 714 (1), 715 (1), 716 (1), 717 (1), 718 (1), 719 (1), 720 (1), 721 (1), 722 (1), 723 (1), 724 (1), 725 (1), 726 (1), 727 (1), 728 (1), 729 (1), 730 (1), 731 (1), 732 (1), 733 (1), 734 (1), 735 (1), 736 (1), 737 (1), 738 (1), 739 (1), 740 (1), 741 (1), 742 (1), 743 (1), 744 (1), 745 (1), 746 (1), 747 (1), 748 (1), 749 (1), 750 (1), 751 (1), 752 (1), 753 (1), 754 (1), 755 (1), 756 (1), 757 (1), 758 (1), 759 (1), 760 (1), 761 (1), 762 (1), 763 (1), 764 (1), 765 (1), 766 (1), 767 (1), 768 (1), 769 (1), 770 (1), 771 (1), 772 (1)|
|24.|__q__|232| @__xml:lang__ (18) : lat (0)|
|25.|__salute__|2||
|26.|__seg__|20| @__rend__ (20) : decorInit (5), above (15)|
|27.|__signed__|1||
|28.|__trailer__|2||
